PROPOSAL PART I: KEY INFORMATION

   ● All of the items in Part I “Key Information” section will be inserted as the opening pages
     of the Phase I proposal.
   ● Do not number the pages in Part I. (Numbering should begin on the first page of the
     “Project Narrative-Technical Content.”)
   ● To structure Part I of your proposal, follow the exact format as the items below.
   ● No other cover pages are permitted to precede Part I.
   ● Proposals that do not include a Part I section exactly as specified below will be rejected
     without review.

Part I: Key Information

Section A.
   A) Project Title: Updating HELP Math using HTML5
   B) Name of the small business: Boulder Learning Inc.
   C) DUNS: 040574427
   D) Small Business Address and Phone: 269 Sam Grange Ct,Carbondale,CO 81623-7716;
       970 704-1465
   E) Company Website URL: https://boulderlearning.com/
   F) For the Principal Investigator, fill in the below table:

 Name                 Address               Phone             Email
                                            Number
 Brandon Helding      2900 S 46th St,       480 829 9678      bhelding@boulderlearni
                      Lincoln, NE 68506                       ng.com




   G) For the representative authorized to represent the small business concern in negotiations,
      fill in the below table:
    H) Name           Address                Phone             Email
                                             Number
 John Ramo            269 Sam Grange         970-948-7062      jramo@boulderlearning.
                      Ct. Carbondale, CO                       com
                      81623




   I) For all key members of the project team in the table below (e.g., Principal Investigator,
      Researcher, Developer, Administrative Assistant), fill in the below table. (Add lines as
      needed)

 Name                 Professional Affiliation      Project Role         Email
                      (list only one affiliation,
                      whether at the small
                      business or another
                      organization, or as an
                      independent consultant)
 Brandon Helding      Boulder Learning, Inc.        PI                   bhelding@boulderl
                                                                         earning.com
 John Ramo            Boulder Learning, Inc.        co-PI                Jramo@boulderlear
                                                                         ning.com
 Linda Hardman        Independent Consultant        Learning Architect   jhardman@austin.rr
                                                                         .com
 Megan Schmeister     Boulder Learning, Inc.        Product Manager      megan@helpprogra
                                                                         m.net
 Venkatesh             Independent Consultant       Program Analysis     mvssoftech@gmail.
 Venkataramani                                                           com
(Add additional lines for more team members)

   J) Indicate whether the proposal is for the R&D of an entirely new product, for R&D to add
      new and unique components to a prototype that already exists and is functioning, or for
      R&D to add new and unique components to a product that is already fully developed.
       (Select only one.)

       ⚪ for R&D of an entirely new product where no (or very limited) previous technological
       development work has occurred

       ⚪ for R&D to add new and unique components to a prototype of an education technology
       product that already exists and is functioning

       X for R&D to add new and unique components to an educational technology product
       that is already fully developed

   K) Video Demonstration: For proposals to develop a new component to an existing
      prototype or a fully developed product that already exists and is functioning, the offeror
      may include a URL (Uniform Resource Locator) link to a video demonstration that
      presents the current version to a reviewer.



Specifications:
   ● Video Demonstrations are optional to include in the proposal. If a video demo is
        included, reviewers will view the video as a component of the proposal.
   ● All Video Demonstrations should be posted to YouTube (http://www.youtube.com/) prior
        to the submission deadline, and available during the review period up to 90-days after.
   ● If the Video Demonstration is posted on a website other than YouTube, it is possible
        reviewers will not be able to watch the video. Videos can be no longer than 4 minutes in
        duration. Reviewers will be instructed to stop viewing at 4 minutes.
   ● Video Demonstrations are not permitted to be updated after submission. If the posting
        date on YouTube for the video is later than the submission date, the video will be deemed
        ineligible for inclusion in the review process.
   ● Offerors are not required to provide a video for proposals for an entirely new product or
        where no (or limited) previous technological development work has occurred, although
        offerors may provide a video on related prior research or development project if they
        choose.

 Insert a URL to a video demonstration           http://boulderlearning.com/products/
 here:                                           helpmath/

   L) Priority. Select one priority area. (Note: While the focus of a proposal may be applicable
      to more than one priority area – offerors must select the priority area that is the best fit.)

   o PRIORITY AREA 2: Products to Modernize Assessment and Support Student
     Learning and Relevant Outcomes

See Section IX for additional information on the Priority Areas.
    M) Abstract. Provide an abstract with the following two components. (Nothing in this
         section should be proprietary or confidential.)
    ● Technical abstract limited to 200 words.
Boulder Learning, Inc. has, as part of it's suite of educational tools, a program entitled HELP
Math (HP). Currently, HELP Math is limited to java platforms using the Chrome browser. This
project will extend HP to include HTML5 such that it can and will run on a variety of browsers,
PCs, Apple, and mobile technologies. Historically, HP has helped students that struggle with
mathematics, and done so with multimedia technologies, interactive storylines, and at the pace of
students as they learn. In fact, HP was featured as a member of the What Works Clearinghouse
(https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Docs/SingleStudyReviews/ wwc_help_102312.pdf)
HP, however, has been limited by the types of computers and browsers available to students that
struggle in schools. The help that HELP Math offers, is therefore, similarly limited. To remedy
this situation the extant HELP Math program will be updated so that it works across a wide set of
platforms, programs, and is thereby that much more effective. HTML5 has been demonstrated
by Google as enhancing the productivity, creativity, engagement, browser compatibility, more
effective and fluent video playback, and is a widely available to public commercial enterprises.
Accordingly, we will use it here.


   ● A summary of the commercial potential of the product or tool if development were
     completed as described above limited to 100 words.

We reviewed the target market in the US in terms of its structure and size. States are responsible
for the education of their residents. These states have 13,588 school districts. According to
statistics compiled by various agencies and organizations, there are over 132,181 operational
public elementary and secondary schools in the U.S. states and DC. If every school bought one
HELP program for each grade level, K-8, revenue would increase nine fold, to $675 million.. A
1% share of this market is $6.75 million annually.
                  PROPOSAL PART II. Project Narrative – Technical Content
1. Significance
a. Problem
       Simply put, the problem that we face as STEM education professionals and stakeholders,
and perhaps as a larger social system, is understanding efficient, effective methods with which to
help children learn. In this proposal, Updating HELP Math using HTML5, Boulder Learning, Inc.
and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln are partnering to add new components and capacities to
an already-developed, and demonstrably efficacious (Drew Polly & Chandra Orrill, 2012)
educational software platform: HELP Math (HM). Specifically, we will address the IES
“PRIORITY AREA 2: Products to Modernize Assessment and Support Student Learning and
Relevant Outcomes”.
        Previous versions of HM have been limited by the types of computers and browsers
available to students that struggle in schools with both language and mathematics. The help that
HELP Math offers, is therefore, similarly limited. To remedy this situation, the extant HELP Math
program will be updated so that it operates across a wide variety of platforms, programs, and is
thereby significantly more effective using HTML5. HTML5 has been linked to enhancing
productivity, creativity, engagement, browser compatibility, more effective and fluent video
playback, and is widely available to public commercial enterprises (Haag, 2011). This is
especially important to ensure that HM can be used across mobile platforms and is that much more
accessible to students, as part of a future wherein mobile technologies become more and more
dominant, especially in shaping young students’ experiences (Bond, 2014; David, 2012). HTML5
as a justifiable innovation is of course not enough to warrant this proposal. The focus on middle
school, rational number mathematics, and language acquisition is also pertinent.
         Overall, there is a continuing clear and urgent need in the U.S. to improve mathematics
instruction and academic achievement of English Language Learners (ELLs) and other struggling
students in grades K-8 (Viesca et al., 2019). Previous version of HM as well as the increased
capacity for it in this proposal focuses on middle school arithmetic (which includes
ratios/proportional reasoning) and rational number understanding of concepts and skills. This is a
critical topic for young learners for several reasons. First, it is the foundation of success in middle
school mathematics (Beyranevand, 2014) and how classroom instruction addresses national
standards (CCSS, 2010). Second, early arithmetic is strongly connected to and predictive of
success in rational number learning (Behr et al., 1992). Third, simple arithmetic is correlated with
interest in STEM careers (Baluch & Page Baluch, 2016). Indeed, HP helps students learn
arithmetic and needs to be updated. This also builds on best practices associated with arithmetic
and multimedia learning (this is discussed in greater detail in other sections of the proposal) (R. E.
Mayer, 2005).
        The combination of a focus on middle and young students’ understanding of arithmetic,
using intelligent, effective online media, and the need for that media to be accessible across a
variety of platforms and operating systems generates a clear and present mandate for the work
described below.
b. The product, its implementation, and the intended outcomes
       HM is meant to help struggling 6-8th grade students. Citing a previous efficacy study
using HM as an intervention (Crawford, Schmeister, & McDonald, 2010), HM is:

Page 1
         a web-based supplementary math curriculum designed for ELL students by
         employing sheltered instruction to deliver math lessons with interactive Spanish
         support. HELP Math is comprised of 44 lessons containing over 100 hours of
         instruction targeting grades six through eight. The four modules include: Numbers
         Make Sense, Geometry, Algebra, and Data Analysis (pg. 15).
A brief overview of HM can be viewed at http://boulderlearning.com/products/helpmath/.
        HM will be supplemented by re-coding using HTML5. HTML5 is the updated Hypertext
Markup Language (HTML), a standard programming language for describing the contents and
appearance of the web pages and its elements. This will ensure cross browser compatibility and
will work with CSS3 (cascading style sheet). At present all major browsers support HTML5 tags
and will render the pages correctly. Secondly, HTML5 is an improved alternative to traditional
flash applications because unlike flash, it does not require an adobe player installed on the user
machine. This is important for adaptations of HTML5 in mobile applications and game
development. Lastly, HTML5 will include video and audio integrations, without needing to rely
on third-party plugins.
        The same outcomes previously obtained by using HM are expected only at greater scale
with HTML5. This is because the efficacious product of HM will be that much more accessible
to struggling students and their teachers.
c. Theoretical and empirical support
         Broadly, HP works because it draws on principles of effective multimedia learning as cited
in extant research. For example, Lemke (1998) compellingly argued that curricular demands for
maximal learning required students to “integrate specialized verbal, visual, and mathematical
literacies quickly and fluently in real time” (pg. 247). Moreover, a recent synthesis of research on
physical and virtual laboratories in science and engineering education (and embedded mathematics
within those virtual laboratories) by de Jon, Linn & Zacharia (2013) concluded that a) virtual
experiments can provide equivalent and often superior learning relative to physical experiments
and the mathematics within it, and b) combining physical manipulation of virtual media
consistently provided superior learning relative to physical experiments alone. Lastly, several
studies have shown greater learning gains when students were able to view or interact with
simulations of unobservable phenomenon (Olympiou et al., 2013). We draw on these principles
in HP and how students interact with the mathematics content. This harkens to a larger learning
principle: the modality principle.
        Modality Principle: The design of one-on-one media tutoring in science and math is based
on a strong foundation of learning theory and evidence in multimedia learning (R. Mayer, 2005;
R. E. Mayer, 2001, 2005). The key finding that motivates the use of multimedia interactive
experiences in learning (with narrated animations) is the modality principle. This is derived from
research indicating that simultaneously presenting visual information with spoken
narration/animations results in the highest retention of information and transfer of knowledge to
new tasks (ibid). More specifically, according to the Cognitive Theory of Multimedia Learning, a
student’s limited capacity for auditory and visual inputs are processed independently, and then
integrated to produce enriched mental representations. HP draws on these learning principles, and
model of cognition in design that has led to its multiple successes and acceptance into the What
Works Clearinghouse.


Page 2
        Other principles include segmentation, pacing, and relatively short intervals that focus on
single concepts (Wouters et al., 2005). This ensures that sensory input is not overloaded and that
learning can be optimized without saturation (Brünken et al., 2002; Sweller & Chandler,
1991). This allows HM to build its successful activities and learning outcomes such that it
corresponds with best practices in multimedia learning in curriculum and instruction as well as
psychology learning theories. Specifically, it draws on sheltered scaffolding.
       Sheltered Instruction and Scaffolding and Techniques Underpinning HELP Features are
described below in Table 1.
Table 1: Sheltered Instruction & Scaffolding Techniques Underpinning HELP Features
    Key Sheltered Instructional                              HELP Feature
             Principle
 Increase content comprehensibility     Synchronizes audio, visual, text, and interactivity
 using extra-linguistic cues            (every page) to create a visual connection between
 (Krashen, 1992)                        words and meaning. For example, corresponding
                                        vocabulary, symbols or pictures flash in sync with
                                        audio.
 Direct, targeted vocabulary            Explicitly teaches vocabulary includes a bilingual &
 development: technical & academic      pictorial dictionary & contextual hyperlinks (every
 English (Collier, 1987; Cummins,       page). Includes key concept vocabulary (fractions,
 1979, 1981; Marzano, 2004)             tessellation), supporting vocabulary (numerator, plane)
                                        & academic English (simplify the expression, which of
                                        the following, if not X then Y).
 Build background concept               Provides comprehensive foundational lessons and tools
 knowledge and pre-requisite skills     to individualize & customize lessons and curriculum.
 (Marzano, 2004)                        Both grade level and prior grade content is always
                                        easily accessible.
 Review and assess throughout with  Provides immediate corrective and encouraging,
 frequent comprehension checks.     positive feedback, consistent throughout all lessons and
 (Echevarria & Short, 1999; Heward, quizzes. HELP interactivity with unobtrusive testing
                                    and feedback is provided shortly after each instruction
 2009)
                                    and demonstration.
 Break down math procedures and         Demonstrates procedural steps and algorithms
 concepts into small “learning          associated with problem solving.
 chucks”
 Home language support and              Provides Spanish audio and full bilingual translation
 translations to make content           (every page).
 comprehensible (Halle et al., 2011)
 Recycle prior knowledge & connect      Provides visual & contextual hints and clues throughout
 what students already know with        the program and “Need More HELP” buttons on every
 what they are learning (Echevarria     “Try-It” page. HELP never allows a student to “get
 & Short, 1999)                         stuck”.


Page 3
 Increase connections to student        Provides “Real World” scenarios at the start of each
 lives                                  lesson.
 (Echevarria & Short, 1999)
 Increase Higher Order Thinking         Explicitly teaches problem solving approaches & test-
 Skills                                 taking skills – how to read, comprehend and answer
                                        ‘look alike’ questions from state standardized math
 (Echevarria & Short, 1999)
                                        tests.
 Repetition and reinforcement of        Incorporates games, puzzles and interactivities
 concepts, procedures and               throughout all lessons (e.g. number lines, base10
 vocabulary through interaction         blocks, drag & drop, money, matching, etc.) which
                                        consistently repeat, vary and contextualize the math
 (Echevarria & Short, 1999)
                                        concepts and vocabulary.
 Repetition and reinforcement           Provides manipulatives available throughout the
                                        program (e.g. calculator, protractors, rulers, fraction
 (Echevarria & Short, 1999)
                                        strips & wheels, thermometers, etc.) with structured and
                                        patterned activities around clear, embedded lesson
                                        objectives.
 Scaffolds the learner by providing a   In addition to all of the above techniques, HELP is also
 cognitive support to move student      replete with music, animation, color, providing a non-
 just beyond what they can learn        threatening environment for practice, knowledge
 unassisted                             construction, and “play”. The “math coach” in the audio
 (Vygotsky & Cambridge, 1978;           speaks at a moderate rate with mild and encouraging
                                        tone. If the student does not understand, they can replay
 Wood et al., 1976)
                                        the audio or look up the Key Terms which they do not
                                        understand or want a visual example of the term.
 Scaffolds the mathematics content      Clear math and language objectives for each lesson,
 instruction (ibid) and simultaneous    embeds NCTM focal points into lesson objectives &
 language acquisition (Echevarria &     course structure, sequencing problems/concepts to
 Short, 1999)                           progress from easy to more difficult, and procedural
                                        and problem solving strategies develop from teacher
                                        (program) modeled to student-directed.


d. Related R/R&D by the project team
        The What Works Clearinghouse gave HELP Math its highest possible rating (WWC Review
of the Report “Help with English Language Proficiency ‘HELP’ Program Evaluation of Sheltered
Instruction Multimedia Lessons,” n.d.). It was based on a study citing statistically significant
higher scores with Digital Direction’s research-based intervention (Score, n.d.). HM is a web-
based intervention designed to develop math proficiency and increase academic language
mastery. Actual screenshots are provided below in Figures 1-11 below.




Page 4
Page 5
         It is aligned with the Common Core State Standards (Drew Polly & Chandra Orrill, 2012),
making it excellent preparation for the content knowledge assessed by PARCC (Partnership for
Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers) (Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for
College and Careers - SAGE Research Methods, n.d.), SBAC (Smarter Balanced Assessment
Consortium) (Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium, 2010), etc. HM can be viewed at
https://boulderlearning.com/products/helpmath/. HM nevertheless requires updating using
HTML5 for several reasons.
        First, HM was originally created using Adobe Flash, which has become a legacy
application and is no longer supported by many, major web browsers. This limits the usefulness
of HM. Second, most modern browsers are explicitly stopping flash content, especially on mobile
platforms, which requires new forms which are more compatible. In this case, that new form is
HTML5. HTML5 has as its greatest advantage developing HM once and be able to deliver it
across platforms and browsers. It can then be delivered in the same way to all users and their
computers: desktops, tablets and smartphones, etc. This will increase the number of users of HM
as well as enhance its effectiveness. The earlier efficacy study included compatible browsers and
computers. When those were available, HM was demonstrably efficacious. For that efficacy to
be realized as effectiveness it needs to be scalable across platforms, browsers, computers, and
thereby users writ large.
e. Uniqueness of proposed product & description of similar products or typical practices
and associated costs
       The following pedagogical features make HM unique because they allow the program to
be used by all students trying to reach proficiency in Math while acquiring both academic and
mathematical language. HM has been used successfully by struggling students with Dyscalculia
and students on the Autism Spectrum as well as ELLs who find the Spanish supports and the
emphasis on Academic Vocabulary especially unique.




Page 6
Table 2: Unique Features of HM
 Unique Aspect                     Unique Features
 Focus on ensuring mastery         HELP Math delivers comprehensive instruction in all foundation
 of foundation skills              skills of math; whole numbers, fractions and decimals, concepts
                                   and skills, number sense, operations, as well as rational numbers
                                   for higher grades. Emphasis is placed on key math milestones:
                                   counting, adding, subtracting, grouping, place value, properties of
                                   operations, measuring (lengths, time, money), shapes and patterns,
                                   and magnitude.
 Explicit and systematic           HELP Math provides explicit and sequential instruction throughout
 instruction                       the lessons, ensuring identification and remediation of any skills
                                   deficits. Concepts are broken down into small learning “chunks,”
                                   enabling increased comprehension.
 Provide models of problem         A variety of scaffolds and descriptive feedback loops are available
 solving, guided practice,         in HELP Math, along with built-in review checks. Concept and
 constant feedback, frequent       skill development progresses from easy to more difficult.
 review
 Use visual representations        As HELP Math is built around sheltered instruction strategies, all
                                   math concepts are represented visually and auditorily.
 Fluent retrieval of facts         Fluency practice is built into all HELP Math lessons.
 (rec. 10 min/day)

 Frequent progress                 HELP Math provides teachers with diagnostic tests to determine
 monitoring                        students’ and class mastery and skills deficits, as well as pro-
                                   actively notifying teachers when students continue to struggle and
                                   recommending further targeted interventions.
 Include motivational              HELP Math utilizes a variety of engaging strategies to deliver
 strategies in tier 2 and tier 3   instruction and ensure mastery, using a range of virtual
 interventions                     manipulatives and tools, such as timelines, fraction wheels, place
                                   value charts, hundreds charts, protractor, calculator, thermometer,
                                   and includes learning games in each lesson.


f. Potential commercial application
        Our commercialization plan is based on a vision of the near future in which we are able to
offer a redeveloped HELP Math program as an updated (HTML5), supplemental, comprehensive
product for students to learn K-8 math and reading, especially struggling language and math
students. It will leverage over a decade of usage by students in 28 states and a research base that
was accepted “without reservation” by the What Works Clearinghouse. Also, upon full funding
for redevelopment, HELP Math will provide immersive experiences through technology
innovations that represent a new generation of intelligent tutoring systems. We will provide
teachers and students with unique, efficient and effective grades K-8 learning tools, with the
primary goal of improving students’ agency and achievement in math and reading.

Page 7
        Our commercialization effort is based on a considered plan. The product, HELP Math will
be enhanced by an upgrade to HTML5 to make the program accessible to all browsers and
platforms and new innovations which will be proposed for the SBIR Phase II project (HELP Math
2.0+R). It will be marketed as a supplemental, comprehensive solution to improve elementary
students’ math and reading achievement. This program will be unique in the integration of math
and reading, aligned with the mission of the Framework Council of Great City Schools (Council
of the Great City Schools, 2014) and will use Boulder Learning’s proprietary speech recognition
technologies with a goal to integrate conversational interaction with emotionally intelligent virtual
tutors using Machine Learning and Deep Learning.
       Initially, HM was funded in 2005 under a USDE Ready to Teach Grant and since then, has
won many awards and has been successfully marketed and sold to schools in 28 states. We
endeavor to re-enter the K-8 math market with Help Math 2.0+R designed to improve math
learning and academic vocabulary and reading fluency after first ensuring it is usable by all
students through the applicability of HTML5. In sum, there is an urgent and critical need to
improve reading and math achievement, in US schools and our innovations have the potential to
provide teachers with a highly efficient, adaptive and affordable tool for improving students’
agency and learning.
Industry Overview and Partners
        Over the past two decades all major education publishers have undertaken a major shift
towards digital publishing. For example, Pearson, the world’s largest education publisher, reports
that a major portion of its revenue is based on sales of digital content. Today, the vast majority of
digital learning systems use the Software as a Service (SaaS) model, in which students interact
with learning programs running on cloud-based servers using computers or mobile devices within
their schools. According to Resnick (2005), about one-half of all digital content delivered to K-12
classrooms in US schools is provided by “small” companies, with annual revenues under $10
million, with the vast majority of these companies having revenues under $2 million. Our
commercialization strategy is to market HELP Math to schools throughout the US through an
expansion of Boulder Learnings’ current strategic partnership with Dallas based Istation, a leading
provider of digital education resources to over 5 million students annually. Additionally, an
obvious strategy for generating initial revenue for our innovation is to market and sell HM to
schools that have previously used HELP Math with only Flash but need an HTML5 version to
renew subscriptions. As mentioned previously, Istation currently serves over 5 million students in
schools across the U.S. CEO, Richard Collins, has agreed to participate in our efforts.
About Istation
        Founded in 1998 and based in Dallas, Texas, Istation (Imagination Station) has become
one of the nation’s leading providers of richly animated, game-like educational technology.
Istation was named one of 2019′s “EdTech 1000: Companies Transforming Education” by EdTech
Digest and has received numerous national educational technology awards. The Istation program
puts more instructional time in the classroom through small-group and collaborative instruction.
Istation’s innovative reading, math and Spanish programs immerse students in an engaging and
interactive environment and inspire them to learn. Additionally, administrators and educators can
use Istation to easily track the progress of their students, schools and classrooms. Istation now
serves more than 4 million students throughout the United States and in several other countries.


Page 8
About Boulder Learning Inc.
        Established in 2016, Boulder Learning is a learning technology company that is a pioneer
in children’s speech recognition technologies. Boulder Learning has been the recipient of over
$25M in research funding from the U.S. Department of Education, The Institute for Education
Sciences and other agencies, and the company has successfully created and disseminated research-
based programs such as Istation’s oral reading fluency assessment in schools across the U.S.
Through government-sponsored research and private investment, Boulder Learning is continuing
to develop technologies for conversational intelligent tutors and automatic assessment systems.
Virtual tutors for reading and science have been developed and rigorously evaluated in real-world
conditions. Several of the systems are being readied for commercial development. Ancillary
marketing and sales for HM will be provided by Sunburst Digital, a value added reseller currently
marketing and selling HELP Math 1.5. Sunburst Digital is the successor company to Educational
Resources and has been in the education business for over 30 years.
US K-12 Education Market: Organization & Size
        We reviewed the target market in the US. States are responsible for the education of their
residents. These states have 13,588 school districts. According to statistics compiled by various
agencies and organizations (e.g.,,(National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Home Page,
part of the U.S. Department of Education, n.d.); Center for Education Reform,(K-12 Facts, n.d.)),
there are over 132,181 operational public elementary and secondary schools in the U.S. states and
DC. Approximately 70% of students are in elementary school (K-8) and 30% in secondary school.
There are about 75,000 elementary schools (including schools that combine elementary and
secondary education). All together there are over 49.5 million public school students and 3.1
million teachers. It is possible to make rough estimates of market size from these numbers. For
example, if every elementary school (75,000) in the US bought one of our programs for $1000,
revenue would be $75 million. If every school bought one HELP program for each grade level,
K-8, revenue would increase nine-fold, to $675 million. This is, very roughly, the potential market
for a K-8 HELP Math 2.0+R product line. A 1% share of this market is $6.75 million annually.
The global online education market is expected to reach approximately USD 132.98 billion by
2023, growing at a CAGR of 28.55% from 2017 to 2023. As such, we believe it is possible to
increase revenues of HELP Math 2.0+R to over $7 million within 2 years of release of HELP Math
2.0. We project sales to reach $28 million after 5 years.
2. Project Time and Overview
        The development of HM with HTML5 is based on an iterative, design-based development
process (Thompson et al., 2004). In this type of design, as products and processes are being
developed, they will be tested for feedback to developers. This in turn feeds improvements to the
product which is continuously tested. In this case, the development will be the recoding of HM
modules with HTML5. Initial testing will be complete with feedback about dysfunctions or “bugs”
across multiple browsers. This will include using PC’s, MAC’s, iOS 13.1, Android KitKat, and
Android 10. On each platform we will test HM lessons using Google Chrome, Mozilla Firefox,
Opera, Microsoft Edge, Apple Safari, Vivaldi, Brave, and Tor. As a team we will build a
compatibility table with every combination of browser and module. This will be followed with
testing with preservice teachers at the University of Nebraska Lincoln. Table 3 shows a timeline
below. Following the Table, the activities for each of the 8 months of the project are described.


Page 9
                               Table 3. Timeline of Work Plan
                              Sep-20           Oct-20          Nov-20              Dec-20
 Tasks                      Wk 1 Wk 2 Wk 1 Wk 2 Wk 1 Wk 2                        Wk 1 Wk 2
 HTML5 Coding                X        X      X        X       X      X            X      X
 Team Testing                                X        X       X      X            X      X
 Teacher Testing
 Feedback                                                X       X        X        X       X
 Surveys
 Focus Group Interviews
 Individual Interviews
                               Jan-21           Feb-21           Mar-21            Apr-21
 Tasks                      Wk 1 Wk 2         Wk 1 Wk 2        Wk 1 Wk 2         Wk 1 Wk 2
 HTML5 Coding                X                                         X          X      X
 Teacher Testing                               X         X      X      X
 Feedback                              X                 X      X      X           X       X
 Surveys                                                               X           X
 Focus Group Interviews                                                            X
 Individual Interviews                                                             X       X

3. Phase 1 Work Plan
       a. Development of the prototype
Month 1: The team will hire specialists to begin recoding HM modules with HTML5. This will
be an ongoing process that must start as soon as possible.
Month 2: The team will develop a protocol for reporting bugs to programmers based on their
testing of the modules as they are developed with HTML5. Based on the initial recoding of HP
using HTML5 we will test the effectiveness of HP using a variety of browsers and platforms. The
five primary team members will complete a set of 32 HM lessons stratified across browser types.
Month 3: Just as in Month 2, the primary project team will continue testing HM modules across
modules. They will complete another 32 HM lessons, reporting bugs to the programmers.
Month 4: This will entail the same process as month 3.
Month 5: We will finalize HTML5 coding and collect feedback through interviews with and
surveys from the interviewers. We will obtain any feedback from them about the process by which
debugging occurs such that alpha testing in the upcoming months with teachers proceeds smoothly.
Month 6: Preservice teachers at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln will begin testing HM
modules. They will provide feedback to the programmers and project team as they test the HM
modules using various browsers. Specifically, we will recruit 32 preservice teachers to test 2
modules per day for 2 days: 4 modules total. They will use various browsers to do so such that
all HM modules are tested across every browser available.
Month 7: As in Month 6, preservice teachers will test HM modules using various browsers.
Specifically, 32 additional preservice teachers will test 2 modules per day for 2 days: 4 modules
total. They will again report findings to the programmers.



Page 10
Month 8: Teachers will be provided with a survey about their experiences being alpha testers.
Based on typical and atypical survey responses (Stake et al., 1994), teachers will be selected for
focus group interviews. Based on selected focus group interview participation, teachers will be
provided semistructured interviews about their experiences using HM and how it can be improved
for broader teacher use.
       b. Pilot Research at the End of Phase I
         The pilot research, based on how this grant work is structured, is built into the development
itself. In fact, as HM modules are recoded using HTML5 and tested first by the primary research
team members and then by preservice teachers. The feedback provided throughout the project by
the research team and teachers to the coders will result in HM modules that run using HTML5.
Only exploratory research will be conducted based on the focus group and individual interviews
during Month 8 with teachers. One primary research question will be explored: How well did
HTML5 allow the HM modules to function, if at all?
        We presume based on the time of investigation that every module will have finally worked
across browsers and the primary question will be about how well HTML5 runs HM modules.
Feedback from the focus group and individual interviews will be coded for themes (Erickson
1986). While there is a great deal more detail that can be provided about the type and nature of
qualitative coding that will be conducted details about this are omitted due to space considerations.
In sum, this will be a test of basic usability. It will support the commercialization plan for HM
and the availability of it on platforms and browsers that broadly use HTML5.
c. Potential problems
         Potential problems we anticipate exist in three primary areas. First, in the process of
coding, the task may be overwhelming. If this is the case, we will simply hire additional
programmers and have study personnel help in the coding. Second, the communication protocol
between the project team, coders, with meetings, memos, emails, etc. will have to be carefully
managed such that miscommunication or misinformation does not accidentally cause dysfunction.
Third, during the testing of the product with teachers, if not enough teachers enroll to be testers
that could be a problematic. If that is the case, we will incentivize participation with greater access
(if not free access) to all HM products, and increase advertising outside colleges of education to
include other pre-professionals. Overall, we do not anticipate many nonlogistical problems with
the project, mostly because the proposal is largely logistical. It will make claims about the
effectiveness of using HTML5 with HM, and be critical to the future of HM as a product that helps
teachers and struggling students.
4. Project Team – Biographical Summary of Each Key Project Team Member
Brandon Helding, PhD, has worked, and is published, as a methodologist, statistician, and
psychometrician. He has worked as methodologist on four NSF-funded grants, one IES-funded
efficacy study, published one book on measurement development, and co-authored a handbook
chapter on design research. Additionally, Dr. Helding is or has externally evaluated social science
projects, has worked as a game developer for Google and the Hispanic Research Center at Arizona
State University, as a policy consultant for the Lincoln Police Department and American Civil
Liberties Union to detect patterns of bias in police officer behaviors with at-risk populations, the
Arizona Department of Juvenile Detention Services in a study that helped determine which
evaluation procedures corresponded with supports to reduce rates of recidivism, the Wellbeing

Page 11
Initiatives, a center for improved mental health services for at-risk individuals, and a conglomerate
of medical researchers with Dr. Susan Haag, Scientific Project Manager at CRESMET and AMTA
at Arizona State University. They plan to establish evidence for advanced screening procedures
for pancreatic cancer and possible clinical drug trials in junction with John Hopkins University.
He will work as project leader and manager.
John Ramo M.Ed., has over 35 years experience in education entrepreneurship, educational
technology and distance learning. Mr. Ramo founded and built a successful Washington D.C.
educational software company, and completed a successful IPO on the NASDAQ. Recently, Mr.
Ramo completed a successful merger of Digital Directions International (DDI) and Boulder
Language Technologies to form Boulder Learning Inc. Previously with DDI, he formed a public
private partnership with the University of Colorado, Rocky Mountain PBS to research and develop
the award winning "HELP Math Program", the first research proven digital supplemental Math
curriculum for Hispanic ELL and other struggling students under a major grants from the U.S.
Department of Education and other foundations and private investment. Earlier in his career Mr.
Ramo conceptualized and produced the first interactive multimedia music instruction software for
the CD-I platform, The Private Lessons Series (Classical Guitar, Jazz Guitar, Rock Guitar, Piano),
for Philips Interactive Media and he is an award-winning producer of educational multimedia
software for other clients such as The Smithsonian Institute, Simon & Schuster, American
Association for the Advancement of Science for whom he led the team that developed the first
multimedia encyclopedia of the environment “Earth Explorer” for middle school students which
was distributed by Apple. He has also worked for America On-Line as an Executive Producer, and
on multi-media projects with names such as Jean Michel Cousteau John Denver, Jodie Foster and
others. Mr. Ramo is a former Special Ed Teacher and has worked with children with special needs
ranging from learning disabled, autism spectrum, to cognitive and behavioral disorders. He holds
a Masters in Educational Psychology; fellowship awarded from American University and
graduated with honors. He will work with the PI on project management.
Linda Hardman, a Learning Architect, is an award-winning K-12 math expert with more than 25
years in educational publishing. Linda has been successful in developing award-winning
competitive products in mathematics such as CODiE award-winning HELP Math, Scholastic’s
MATH 180 (a blended learning curriculum of print and online lessons/assessments and includes
whole group, small group and individualized instruction (Math 180 Program | 5-12 Math
Intervention Curriculum | Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, n.d.). Imagine Learning’s Imagine Math
(Think Through Math: 2012, 2015 CODiE awards for Best Mathematics Instructional Solution; an
adaptive online language-rich grades 3 - Geometry math program that’s personalized by the
Quantile Framework, scaffolded, and provides on-demand tutoring by certified math teachers
(Imagine Math 3–8 | ImagineLearning, n.d.), Harcourt’s Summer Studio Math, and Prentice Hall’s
6-12 math product arrays which also includes CODiE award-winning Prentice Hall’s Secondary
Mathlab Toolkit. Linda is also the lead author of SAT Math Level 2 Subject Test Crash Course,
which has received raving reviews. Linda has extensive e-Learning, ELL, Intervention, and
Special Education product development experience, along with extensive assessment development
experience with high-stakes tests, such as TAKS, FCAT, SAT, Algebra EOC, GRE, and GMAT.
She will oversee the overall process of collecting and collating feedback.
Megan Schmeister MA – With over 15 years in education, Megan has spent the last ten as Product
Manager for HELP Math. Previous to working directly for HELP Math, Megan was part of two
research grants, a US Department of Education Ready to Teach grant and a US Department of

Page 12
Education IES Special Education grant. As part of that work, she has several publications,
including an award for Article of the Year from Assessment for Effective Intervention. During the
last ten years, as HELP Math’s Product Manager, she has worked closely with teachers as they
implement the program with their students. She will oversee the changes to HM that needs to be
reflected in the coding.
Venkatesh Venkataramani, Venkatesh V. developed several educational technologies in his former
role as Director of MVS Softech, a leading educational international technology company. As an
industry leader in Corporate eLearning, interactive multimedia, and learning technologies,
Venkatesh V. is committed to providing clients with cost-effective solutions utilizing various
learning technologies. He has extensive research and development experience in hypermedia
authoring, advanced scientific visualization, database management systems, and computer
simulation. He will oversee the coding of HM lessons with HTML5.
5. External Evaluation - ReNU Evaluation narrative
        The evaluation will be directed by Dr. Trish Wonch Hill, Research Coordinator of the
Methodology and Evaluation Research Core Facility. Dr. Hill and her team of evaluation faculty
and staff are currently evaluating dozens of grants focused on STEM education. Formative
evaluation feedback will be presented to the program team monthly through the duration of the
grant. This will provide information needed to most effectively meet the proposed goal and
objectives. The impact of the activities relative to the program’s goal and objectives will be
assessed in the summative evaluation. The formative and summative evaluations will rely on a
combination of qualitative and quantitative data.
         To assess usability of HELP Math, MERC will assist in recruiting, consenting, tracking,
and providing incentives to UNL pre-service teachers who elect to participate in testing the
usability of up to four modules after the HELP Math HTLM5 update. MERC evaluators will also
recruit, host, and assist in the facilitation and provide transcript for 5 focus groups of HELP Math
users, as well as facilitate follow-up interviews. MERC program staff will report feedback to the
Project PI at Boulder Learning at each stage of the evaluation process, and will compile all results
into a summative report at the culmination of the grant.
6 .References
Baluch, D. P., & Page Baluch, D. (2016). Jumpstarting STEM Careers. In Forward to
       Professorship in STEM (pp. 63–76). https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-800855-3.00004-
       0
Behr, M. J., Harel, G., Post, T. R., & Lesh, R. (1992). Rational number, ratio, and proportion.
       https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1992-97586-014
Beyranevand, M. L. (2014). The Different Representations of Rational Numbers. In Mathematics
      Teaching in the Middle School (Vol. 19, Issue 6, p. 382).
      https://doi.org/10.5951/mathteacmiddscho.19.6.0382
Bond, E. (2014). Childhood, Mobile Technologies and Everyday Experiences: Changing
       Technologies=Changing Childhoods? Palgrave Macmillan, London.
Brünken, R., Steinbacher, S., Plass, J. L., & Leutner, D. (2002). Assessment of cognitive load in
      multimedia learning using dual-task methodology. Experimental Psychology, 49(2), 109–
      119.

Page 13
CCSS. (2010). Common core state standards for English language arts & literacy in
      history/social studies, science, and math. Common Core State Standards Initiative.
      http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI_ELA%20Standards.pdf
Collier, V. P. (1987). Age and Rate of Acquisition of Second Language for Academic Purposes.
        TESOL Quarterly, 21(4), 617–641.
Council of the Great City Schools. (2014). A Framework for Raising Expectations and
      Instructional Rigor for English Language Learners. ERIC Clearinghouse.
Cummins, J. (1979). Linguistic Interdependence and the Educational Development of Bilingual
     Children. Review of Educational Research, 49(2), 222–251.
Cummins, J. (1981). The role of primary language development in promoting educational
     success for language minority students. Schooling and Language Minority Students. A
     Theoretical Framework. https://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/10029777893/
David, M. (2012). Building Websites With HTML5 to Work With Mobile Phones. In HTML5
       Mobile Websites (pp. 3–53). https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-240-81813-9.00007-0
de Jong, T., Linn, M. C., & Zacharia, Z. C. (2013). Physical and virtual laboratories in science
       and engineering education. Science, 340(6130), 305–308.
Drew Polly, & Chandra Orrill. (2012). CCSSM: Examining the Critical Areas in Grades 5 and 6.
      Teaching Children Mathematics, 18(9), 566–573.
Echevarria, J., & Short, D. (1999). The Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol: A tool for
      teacher-researcher collaboration and professional development. ERIC Digest EDO, 99.
      http://esol2.pbworks.com/f/The%20Sheltered%20Instruction%20Observation%20Protoc
      ol.doc
Haag, J. (2011). From elearning to mlearning: the effectiveness of mobile course delivery. The
       Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation & Education Conference (I/ITSEC), 2011.
       http://www.academia.edu/download/32546183/11053-paper.pdf
Halle, T., Castro, D., Franco, X., McSwiggan, M., Hair, E., & Wandner, L. (2011). The role of
        early care and education in the development of young Latino dual language learners.
        Latina and Latino Children and Mental Health, 1, 63–90.
Heward, Y. (2009). Setting a poor example. In Paediatric Nursing (Vol. 21, Issue 3, pp. 8–8).
      https://doi.org/10.7748/paed.21.3.8.s9
K-12 Facts. (n.d.). The Center for Education Reform. Retrieved February 27, 2020, from
      https://www.edreform.com/2012/04/k-12-facts/
Krashen, S. D. (1992). Fundamentals of language education. Laredo Publishing Company.
Lemke, J. (1998). Multiplying meaning: Visual and verbal semiotics in scientific text. In J. R.
      Martin & R. Veel (Eds.), Reading Science (pp. 87–113). Routeledge.
Marzano, R. J. (2004). Building Background Knowledge for Academic Achievement: Research
      on What Works in Schools. ASCD.
Mayer, R. (2005). The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning (R. Mayer (Ed.); pp. 169–
       182). Cambridge University Press.


Page 14
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia Learning. Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, R. E. (2005). Introduction to multimedia learning. The Cambridge Handbook of
       Multimedia Learning, 2, 1–24.
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Home Page, part of the U.S. Department of
       Education. (n.d.). Retrieved February 27, 2020, from https://nces.ed.gov/
Olympiou, Zacharia, & deJong. (2013). Making the invisible visible: Enhancing students’
      conceptual understanding by introducing representations of abstract objects in a
      simulation. Instructional Science, 41.
Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers - SAGE Research Methods.
       (n.d.). https://doi.org/10.4135/9781506326139.n507
Resnick, M. L. (2005). Human factors in digital rights management for consumer products. In
       PsycEXTRA Dataset. https://doi.org/10.1037/e577472012-012
Score, C. in R. (n.d.). Student Increase on Post-test by Grade Level.
       https://www.helpprogram.net/DealerDocs/HELP%20Math%20Evaluation%20White%20
       Paper%205-13.pdf
Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium. (2010). Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium:
       Theory of Action: An Excerpt from the Smarter Balanced Race to the Top Application.
       ERIC Clearinghouse.
Stake, R. E., Denzin, N. K., Lincoln, Y. S., & Oaks, C. A. (1994). Case studies. In and Eds
       Handbook of Qualitative Research Pp Thousand Sage Publications Inc, 236–247 SRC –
       GoogleScholar.
Sweller, J., & Chandler, P. (1991). Evidence for Cognitive Load Theory. In Cognition and
       Instruction (Vol. 8, Issue 4, pp. 351–362). https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532690xci0804_5
Thompson, T., Heer, D., Brown, S., Traylor, R., & Fiez, T. S. (2004). Educational design,
     evaluation, development of platforms for learning. 34th Annual Frontiers in Education,
     2004. FIE 2004., T3E/1–T3E/4 Vol. 1.
Viesca, K. M., Joseph, N. M., & Commins, N. L. (2019). A Framework for Improving the
       Teaching of Mathematics to Bi/Multilingual Learners. In Teaching the Content Areas to
       English Language Learners in Secondary Schools (pp. 135–150).
       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02245-7_9
Vygotsky, L. S., & Cambridge, M. A. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher
      psychological processes.
Wood, D., Bruner, J. S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of
      Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 17(2), 89–100.
Wouters, P., Paas, F., & Van Merriënboer, J. (2005). Observational learning from multimedia
      based expert models: The relation between modality, pacing and segmentation. Th
      European Conference for Research on Learning and Instruction, Nicosia, Cyprus.
      http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.87.2527&rep=rep1&type=pdf
WWC Review of the Report “Help with English Language Proficiency ‘HELP’ Program
     Evaluation of Sheltered Instruction Multimedia Lessons.” (n.d.).

Page 15
                                         Appendix A
No Prior Fast-Track or Phase II SBIR awards to report.
                    Appendix B
Letter of Support from University of Nebraska-Lincoln
                                                                                                  OFFICE OF SPONSORED PROGRAMS




                                                                                                       VIA EMAIL
February 28, 2020                                                                               NUgrant ID# 133910

Brandon Helding, Ph.D
269 Sam Grange Ct.,
Carbondale, CO, USA 81623

Re: UNL Institutional Letter of Commitment

Dear Dr. Helding:

The Board of Regents of the University of Nebraska, for the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
(UNL) is pleased to submit a proposal to your organization on behalf of Patricia Wonch Hill, for
the project titled “Evaluating HELP Math HTLM5 Update.”

The total request is for $59,039 for the proposed period 09/01/2020 - 05/31/2021. Our EIN # is
47-0049123, our DUNS # is 55-545-6995, and our Congressional District is NE-001. Our
participation is administratively approved for submission on behalf of the Board of Regents by
the appropriate University officials.

Questions regarding the technical aspects of this project should be directed to Dr. Wonch Hill at
(402) 472-7646 or phill3@unl.edu. Administrative questions should be directed to Kacey Nelkin
Pedersen at (402) 472-6174 or knelkinpedersen2@unl.edu. We look forward to our involvement
in this project.

Sincerely,



Kacey Nelkin Pedersen, CRA
Grants Coordinator III
Office of Sponsored Programs




             151 Prem S. Paul Research Center / 2200 Vine Street / P.O. Box 830861 / Lincoln, NE 68583-0861
                       (402) 472-3171 / FAX (402) 472-9323 / research.unl.edu/sponsoredprograms
                                       Appendix C
They are included below. The remainder of this page is intentionally left blank.
(1) Certifications (1-page)

 Each individual on the project team must certify the following statement by providing the
 information below:

         "I hereby certify that this information is accurate to the best of knowledge and
         belief."

         Individual’s Name (TYPED):Brandon Helding



         Written signature: _                     __________________________

         Date:3/1/20

 Each employee of the offeror with the authority to bind the offeror must certify the
 following statement by providing the information below:

         "I hereby certify that Boulder Learning, Inc. has verified the foregoing information
         that is accurate to the best of our knowledge and belief."

         Individual’s Name (TYPED): Brandon Helding

         Individual’s Title (TYPED): PI / Methodologist



         Written signature: _                     __________________________

         Date:3/1/20
                                              BRANDON HELDING
                                               Boulder Learning, Inc.
                                           bhelding@boulderlearning.com

EDUCATION
Arizona State University              Elementary Education                                     B.A., 2005
Arizona State University              Curriculum and Instruction (Math Education)              Ph.D., 2010

PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
2009 – Present       Statistician/Methodologist, Boulder Language Technologies
2007 – Present       Statistical consulting for Dr. Clark and Dr. Mathur, special education grant investigating factors
                     contributing to recidivism (ongoing indefinitely)
2007 – Present       Methodological consulting for Dr. Bahadir Yanik, Turkey International Education and Career
                     Center, proposal, Anatolyo University, Turkish Ministry of Education, Turkey (ongoing
                     indefinitely)
2009 – 2010          Postdoctoral research associate, “Moving from Arithmetic to Algebra in Murphy School District:
                     Multilevel Insights” (Grant No. 0634103)
2008 – 2010          Gaming consultant, Hispanic Research Center, Arizona State University
2007 – 2009          Statistical analyst, Math and Science Partnership, data
2007 – 2008          Statistical consulting for Dr. Oakes, special education grant

SELECTED PUBLICATIONS
1.   Lewis, E.B., Baker, D.R., & Helding, B.A. (2015). Science teaching reform through professional development:
     Teachers’ use of a scientific classroom discourse community model. Science Education, 99(5), 896-931.
2.   Helding, B. (2010). Measurement in the service of mathematics education research: The case of Cognitively
     Guided Instruction. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing: Saarbrücken, Germany.
3.   Helding, B., Megowan-Romanowicz, M. C., Ganesh, T., & Fang, S. (2009). Interdisciplinary modeling
     instruction: Helping fifth graders learn about levers. In, R. Lesh, P. Galbraith, C. Haines, & A. Hurford (Eds.),
     Modeling Students’ Mathematical Modeling Competencies: ICTMA 13. New York, NY: Springer Science +
     Business Media, Inc.
4.   Sloane, F., Helding B. & Kelly, A. (2008). Interrupted time series designs for design research in mathematics
     education. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.). The handbook of design research in mathematics, science and technology
     education. New York, NY: Taylor Francis.
5.   Sloane, F., Helding, B. & Kelly, A. (2008). Modeling student development in science education: An introduction
     to growth modeling. In K. Tobin, & M. Wolfe (Eds.). The World of Science Education: North America.

SYNERGISTIC ACTIVITIES
1.   Middleton, J., Helding, B., Carruthers, C., Megowan-Romanowicz, C., Kim, A., Kim, Y., Yanik, B., Flores, A.,
     & Atkinson, R. (2008). A Longitudinal Study of Rational Number Understanding in the Middle-Grades: Final
     Report to the National Science Foundation. Center for Research on Education in Science, Mathematics,
     Engineering, and Technology.
2.   Cole, R., & Helding, B. (2016). Teachers’ and Children’s Experiences with MindStars Books. Final report to the
     National Science Foundation, Boulder Learning, Inc.
3.   Cole, R. & Helding, B. (2015). Teachers’ and Children’s Experiences with MindStars Books. Report submitted
     to Boulder Valley School District, Boulder Learning, Inc.
4.   External Evaluation Consultant: Dr. Ganesh, WATER Science Professional Development.
5.   Consulting Methodologist: Dr. Haag, Power analyses for Clinical trials for upcoming screening processes for
     pancreatic cancer – potential external evaluation.
6.   Consulting Statistician: American Civil Liberties Union, Working on two projects: 1) examine bias in Lincoln
     Police Department detainment, and 2) examine potential differential rates of revoked bail for underrepresented or
     at-risk groups control for demographic information..
7.   External Evalator: STEMteachersNYC. Grant providing Professional Development.




                                                                                                                     1
Vitae
John Ramo M.Ed.,

John Ramo has over 35 years of experience in education entrepreneurship,
educational technology and digital learning. Mr. Ramo founded and built a
successful Washington D.C. educational software company and completed
a successful IPO on the NASDAQ. In 2017, Mr. Ramo completed a
successful merger of Digital Directions International (DDI) and Boulder
Language Technologies to form Boulder Learning Inc. Previously with DDI,
he formed a public private partnership with the University of Colorado,
Rocky Mountain PBS to research and develop the award winning "HELP
Math Program", the first research proven digital supplemental Math
curriculum for Hispanic ELL and other struggling students under a major
grants from the U.S. Department of Education and other foundations and
private investment. Earlier in his career Mr. Ramo conceptualized and
produced the first interactive multimedia music instruction software for the
CD-I platform, The Private Lessons Series (Classical Guitar, Jazz Guitar, Rock
Guitar, Piano), for Philips Interactive Media and he is an award-winning
producer of educational multimedia software for other clients such as The
Smithsonian Institute, Simon & Schuster, American Association for the
Advancement of Science for whom he led the team that developed the first
multimedia encyclopedia of the environment “Earth Explorer” for middle
school students which was distributed by Apple. He has also worked for
America On-Line as an Executive Producer, and on multi-media projects
with names such as Jean Michel Cousteau John Denver, Jodie Foster and
others. Mr. Ramo is a former Special Ed Teacher and has worked with
Special Needs children ranging from learning disabled, autism spectrum, to
cognitive and behavioral disorders. He holds a Master’s in educational
psychology; fellowship awarded from The American University and
graduated with honors. Mr. Ramo’s projects have won numerous awards in
radio, film and digital education.
                                          Appendix C
(1) Certifications (1-page)

 Each individual on the project team must certify the following statement by providing the
 information below:

        "I hereby certify that this information is accurate to the best of knowledge and
        belief."

        Individual’s Name (TYPED): Linda A. Hardman


        Written signature: _
        __________________________

        Date: February 29, 2020

 Each employee of the offeror with the authority to bind the offeror must certify the
 following statement by providing the information below:

        "I hereby certify that (FILL IN THE COMPANY NAME) has verified the
        foregoing information that is accurate to the best of our knowledge and belief."

        Individual’s Name (TYPED): Linda A. Hardman

        Individual’s Title (TYPED): President, Linda A. Hardman Consulting Inc.


        Written signature: _

        Date: February 29, 2020
                                            LINDA A. HARDMAN
                                  6800 Canon Wren Drive       Austin, TX 78746
                        512-330-9670      512-299-2017 (cell)      jhardman@austin.rr.com

Publishing, Assessment, and Learning Technologies Executive with proven leadership who has been successful in
developing award-winning/competitive products in mathematics, science, language arts, and social studies. Has produced
highly comprehensive products (core curriculum, assessment/testing, textbooks, online learning courseware, technology
supplementals, iPad and apps, professional development training, and learning aides) while addressing state/CCSS
objectives/benchmarks and high-stakes tests. Has had personal responsibility for:
• Product and Assessment Development:
            o Project Management                                             o Assessment Writing and Development
            o Editorial                                                      o Meeting budgetary constraints and
            o Content Writing: Teacher and Student                                revenue targets
                Resources                                                    o Delivering products on-time
• Lead Author: SAT Math Level 2 Subject Test Crash Course
• Extensive e-Learning, ELL, Intervention, and Special Education Product Development
• Assessment Development: high-stakes tests, such as TAKS, FCAT, SAT, Algebra EOC, GRE, and GMAT

Award-winning Products: HELP Math: CODiE Award 2009 and 2010: Best Instructional Solution for Special
Needs Students and CODiE Awards Finalist 2009: Best Mathematics Instructional Solution; Think Through Math
(Imagine Math): 2012, 2014, 2015 CODiE awards for Best Mathematics Instructional Solution and a finalist in 2016;
Harcourt’s Summer Studio Math (grades 1-6), Teacher’s Choice Award; Prentice Hall’s Secondary Mathlab Toolkit for
middle school and high school (CODiE Award)

Experience
Imagine Learning, Provo, UT                                            August 2016 – December 2018
Executive Director Instructional Design, Mathematics
Directed the design, development, and planning of all mathematics products which includes the re-design of acquired
mathematics products to increase students’ conceptual and procedural understanding of mathematics concepts and skills
for grades PK - Geometry. Developed a collaboration with The Dana Center.

Linda A. Hardman Consulting Inc. (principal), Austin, TX                                        2000 ─ Present
Certified Texas Historically Underutilized Business (HUB)
Provided consultant services in project management, product and assessment development, and training for
technology/web applications, eLearning, courseware, and textbook products, all of which included working in
learning/content management systems. Clients include: Scholastic Education/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, Redbird
Learning (now McGraw-Hill), Digital Directions International (now Boulder Learning), Compass Learning (now
Edgenuity Inc.), Measured Progress, Pearson Assessment, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, EdTech Games, and Ellevation.

Scholastic Education, New York, NY                                                     June 2012 – August 2013
Director Math Publishing. Led the development of all math publishing products, which included MATH 180.

Harcourt Achieve, Austin, TX                                                                           2004 – 2005
Vice President Product Development Mathematics (Saxon Math, Steck-Vaughn, and Rigby).

Bell & Howell Information & Learning (ProQuest), Ann Arbor, MI                         Spring 1999 – Fall 2000
Vice President (Science, Technology, and Mathematics & Medical) and Publisher

Cogito Learning Media, New York City, and San Francisco, CA                                            1998 – 1999
Vice President, Business Development & Special Projects

Pearson Education, Prentice Hall School Division, NJ                                                   1994 – 1998
Vice President, Educational Technology
                                          Appendix C
(1) Certifications (1-page)

 Each individual on the project team must certify the following statement by providing the
 information below:

        "I hereby certify that this information is accurate to the best of knowledge and
        belief."

        Individual’s Name (TYPED): Megan Schmeister

        Written signature: ___________________________

        Date: March 1, 2020

 Each employee of the offeror with the authority to bind the offeror must certify the
 following statement by providing the information below:

        "I hereby certify that (Boulder Learning Inc.) has verified the foregoing
        information that is accurate to the best of our knowledge and belief."

        Individual’s Name (TYPED): Megan Schmeister

        Individual’s Title (TYPED): Product Manager

        Written signature: ___________________________

        Date: March 1, 2020
                                                    Megan Schmeister
EDUCATION:
  M.A. in Special Education: December 2006
     University of Colorado – Colorado Springs, CO
  B.A. in Psychology: December 1998
      University of Colorado – Colorado Springs, CO

EXPERIENCE:
  Product Manager / Head of Teacher Support
     Boulder Learning / Digital Directions International
     August 2010 – present
  Professional Research Assistant
      University of Colorado - Colorado Springs, College of Education
      August 2009 – May 2010
          • U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Statistics (IES), Special Education Research Grant
          • The Math Learning Companion: An Individualized Intervention for Students with Math Learning Disabilities
  Professional Research Assistant
      University of Colorado - Colorado Springs, College of Education
      June 2006 – May 2009
          • U.S. Department of Education, Ready to Teach grant
          • Help with English Language Proficiency (HELP) Program
  Adjunct Professor
     University of Colorado - Colorado Springs, College of Education, Special Education
     January 2008 – May 2008
  Resource Teacher
     Colorado Springs School District 11, Special Education
     August 2005 – May 2006
  Job Coach / Educational Assistant
      Colorado Springs School District 11, Special Education / Alternative Cooperative Education (ACE)
      August 2004 – August 2005
  Substitute Teacher
     Colorado Springs School District 11
     October 2003 – August 2004

PUBLICATIONS:
  Crawford, L., Carpenter, D. M., Wilson, M. T., Schmeister, M., & McDonald, M. (2012). Testing the Relationship between Fidelity of
  Implementation and Student Outcomes in Math. Assessment for Effective Intervention, 37(4), 224-235.
  Crawford, L., Schmeister, M., & Biggs, A. (2008). Impact of intense professional development on teachers’ use of sheltered instruction with
  students who are English language learners. Journal of Inservice Education, 34(3), 327-342.
  University of Colorado, Colorado Springs. (2006). Freedom’s Song: 100 Years of African American Struggle and Triumph. Colorado
  Springs, Colorado: Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH).

PRESENTATIONS:
  Schmeister, M. (November 2011). HELP Implement for Response to invention (RtI) for ELL Math. Presentation at the National Council of
  Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) Regional Conference & Exposition, Albuquerque, NM.
  Crawford, L., Schmeister, M., & McDonald, M. (April 2009). Researching the effects of a supplemental mathematics curriculum for English
  language learners. Paper presented at session Promising Applied Research Practices for Second Language Learners at the 2009 American
  Educational Research Association (AERA) Annual Meeting - Disciplined Inquiry: Education Research in the Circle of Knowledge, San
  Diego, CA.
  Freeman, B., & Schmeister, M. (October 2007). Help for English language proficiency (HELP) program. Presentation at the Annual
  Colorado Council of Teachers of Mathematics (CCTM) Conference, Denver, CO.
  Crawford, L., Lawyer-Brook, D., Schmeister, M., McDonald, M., & Franco, L. (March 2007). Effects of a web-based mathematics program.
  Presentation at the 41st Annual Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) Convention and Exhibit, Seattle, WA.

AWARDS:
  Article of the Year: April 2013 – Assessment for Effective Intervention
                                          Appendix C
(1) Certifications (1-page)

 Each individual on the project team must certify the following statement by providing the
 information below:

        "I hereby certify that this information is accurate to the best of knowledge and
        belief."

        Individual’s Name (TYPED): VENKATESH VENKATARAMANI




        Written signature: _________                  __________________

        Date:

 Each employee of the offeror with the authority to bind the offeror must certify the
 following statement by providing the information below:

        "I hereby certify that (FILL IN THE COMPANY NAME) has verified the
        foregoing information that is accurate to the best of our knowledge and belief."

        Individual’s Name (TYPED): VENKATESH VENKATARAMANI

        Individual’s Title (TYPED): INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT




        Written signature: ___________                   ________________

        Date:
                                                 Resume
V. VENKATESH
Email ID          : mvssoftech@gmail.com



Education                         :    B.Sc. Mathematics from Madras University

                                       Higher Diploma in Software Engineering
                                       From Aptech.

Software skills                   :    Adobe Suite, HTML, HTML5, MS-Office, other multimedia
                                       Tools, .NET

                                          PERSONAL DETAILS

Name                               :    V. Venkatesh

Date of birth                      :    21-02-1975

Nationality                        :    Indian

Experience                         :     Multimedia Designer @ Pentamedia Graphics (1 Year) -1998-1999
                                         Visual Designer @ SSI Limited – 1999 - 2001
                                         Project Lead @ Til Studios -2001-2002
                                         Director @ MVS Softech – 2002 – 2018
                                         Independent Consultant – 2019 – till date



Declaration:
                 I hereby declare that the statement made in this application are true complete and correct
to the best of my knowledge and belief.


                                                                                                 Sincerely,



                                                                                        [V. VENKATESH]
                                         Appendix D
There is nothing applicable to report.
                                                         Appendix E
                                         PHASE I BUDGET INFORMATION
                                   (MAXIMUM OF $200,000 FOR 8-MONTHS)
   • Budget Narrative Justification for Phase I (limit 1-page for the narrative):
   • Spreadsheet for Phase I (use the template below):
Price Category                                                        HOURS           RATE     TOTAL
Labor
Brandon Helding, Principle Investigator                                574        X   $20.83   $11956.42
John Ramo, Co-Principle Investigator                                   574        X   $20.83   $11956.42
Linda Hardman, Co-Principle Investigator                               574        X   $20.83   $11956.42
Megan Schmeister, Co-Principle Investigator                            574        X   $20.83   $11956.42
Venkatesh V, Co-Principle Investigator                                 574        X   $20.83   $11956.42
Labor Overhead                                           Rate              0%                  $0
Fringe Benefits                                                            0%                  $0
Total Direct Cost                                                                              $59782.10
Other Direct Costs
 Travel                                                                                        $0
Copy/print/message                                                                             $200.90

Technical Assistance (maximum of $6,500)
(See Appendix H)                                                                               $0
Consultant                                                                                     $80000


Subcontractors(no more than 33% of the total Phase I price)                                     $58,969
Total ODCs                                                                                     $140200
Total Direct Costs                                                                             $59782.10
G&A                                                      Rate               %                  $0
Total Cost                                                                                     $199169
Profit                                                   Rate               %                  $0


TOTAL PRICE                                                                                    $199169
Funding Agency: NSF Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK12               Project Start Date: 6/1/2020
PI Name: Martha Gregg                                               Project End Date: 5/31/2023
Project Title: TBD
                   UNL Basic Request Budget
                                  Person
                                 Months     Year 1      Total
Senior Personnel                    Yr1
Patricia Wonch Hill              3.00         17,116      17,116
                  Total Senior Personnel      17,116      17,116
Other Personnel                  # of Ppl
                      Post Docs         0        -           -
            Other Professionals         0        -           -
             Graduate Students       0.00        -           -
        Undergraduate Students          0        -           -
                     Secretarial        0        -           -
                          Other         0        -           -
                  Total Other Personnel          -           -
Fringe Benefits                                6,846       6,846
              Total Salaries and Benefits     23,962      23,962
Equipment                                        -           -
Travel                                           -           -
Supplies                                         100         100
Subawards                                        -           -
Other                                         13,860      13,860
                 Total Other Direct Costs     13,960      13,960
                       Total Direct Costs     37,922      37,922
F&A Base                         TDC          37,922
F&A                              55.5%        21,047      21,047
                           Total Request      58,969      58,969

MTDC Exclusions                             Year 1      Total
                              Equipment           -             -
                       Tuition Remission          -             -
            Subawards in excess of $25K           -             -
               Participant Support Costs          -             -
                                    Rent          -             -
            Alterations and Renovations           -             -
                        Total Exclusions          -             -
                  HELP Math Budget Justification – Boulder Learning Inc.
        The budget for this proposal, while nearing the maximum allotted amount, provides modest
compensation for the primary research staff. Each primary researcher will receive $11,956.42 in
total compensation for 8 months of work.
        Copy and print services include electronic storage for copying files and printing documents
as part of dissemination efforts. No other costs are included in thise ction.
       The bulk of the Boulder Learning, Inc. budget ($80,000) is allocated for a consulting
computer scientists or team of computer scientists that will be charged with recoding the HM
lessons with HTML5. Because this is the primary work of the grant, this is justified.
       The University of Nebraska-Lincoln will oversee the project (as external evaluator) and
provide preservice teachers for data collection. They will also oversee the focus group and
individual interviews, data management, and verify Institutional Review Board (IRB) clearances.
As a result, they are budgeted at $58,969.
        Of particular note in this budget is that there is no profit allocated for Boulder Learning,
Inc. We expect the profit to originate from the updated HM lessons with HTML5. This will
correspond with our commercialization plan as well as the general business model of the company
itself.
                           HELP Math Budget Justification – MERC
Personnel
Dr. Hill (Evaluation Lead, 0.3 calendar months) will coordinate all data collection and will be
responsible for writing reports and reporting back to the MATH Help leadership and reporting to
the funding agency.
Other Direct Costs
MERC Evaluation Service Center
The Methodology and Evaluation Research Core Facility, a service center, will be utilized to carry
out data collection. Program evaluation manager, and project associates time is estimated at a total
of 120 hours to assist in data collection for five focus groups and follow-up interviews. They will
assist in qualitative data analysis and reporting. Undergraduates will enter data and assist with
interview transcription for approximately 60 total hours.
The Methodology and Evaluation Research Core Facility (MERC) is a core facility housed within
the Social and Behavioral Sciences Research Consortium at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
The mission of the Methodology and Evaluation Research Core Facility (MERC) is to provide
state-of-the-art methodological support and services that promote and sustain excellence in the
social and behavioral sciences. MERC provides consultation on evaluation designs and the
implementation of social science research and evaluation for funded grants. MERC provides
evaluation for dozens of NSF projects, serving a variety of evaluation roles to best fit the
investigators’ needs, including serving as an internal evaluator, an external evaluator, an evaluation
consultant, a social science expert, or providing trainings to build evaluation capacity.




                                                  1
Study Subject Payments
Approximately 50 pre-service teachers from UNL will be recruited to conduct 4-6 hours of
usability testing. Each participant will test 4 modules of HELP Math using two different browsers
and will be payed $50 upon completion. Additionally, 25 pre-service teachers will participate in
3-5 60-90-minute focus groups and will receive $10 for their participation. Finally, follow-up
interviews with 5 pre-service teachers will last 30-60 minutes will be conducted prior to
finalization of the update to smooth out final updates to HELP Math.
MERC Supplies
Costs are estimated at $100/year in Years 1-3 to purchase consumable materials and supplies for
the proposed work, such as printing costs for papers and posters and supplies for data collection.
Facilities & Administrative Cost
UNL’s federally negotiated rate is 55.5% of MTDC for organized research.
               MTDC Base F&A Costs
       Y1      37,922         21,047




                                                2
                                          Appendix F
                                  Human Subjects Protections
EDAR 3452.224-71 Notice About Research Activities Involving Human Subjects (MAY 2011)
   (a) All procedures are complied with.
   (b) All definitions are accepted.
   (c) This project is exempt under 34 CFR 97.101(b) (2): “Research involving the use of
       educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, aptitude, achievement), survey procedures,
       interview procedures or observation of public behavior”. Applicably, neither exclusions
       to is exemption This project is exempt under 34 CFR 97.101(b) (2), (i) or (ii) apply.
        All participants in this project will provide anonymized responses in the form of bug
reports to the project team and coders directly. Anonymization will occur at the source of the
data information. That is, when the forms are completed and submitted, at no point will the
submitter’s name be included in that form. There will be no manipulation of a naturally
occurring environment.
       Interviews (focus group and individual) will not include any identification information
and will only be transcribed with pseudonyms.
   (d) No children will be included in the study.
   (e) This project is exempt under 34 CFR 97.101(b) (2): “Research involving the use of
       educational tests (cognitive, diagnostic, aptitude, achievement), survey procedures,
       interview procedures or observation of public behavior”. Applicably, neither exclusions
       to is exemption This project is exempt under 34 CFR 97.101(b) (2), (i) or (ii) apply.
   (f) All research activities and exemptions will be processed through the Institutional Review
       Board (IRB) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL).
                                            Appendix G
Appendix G: Department of Education Required Information (Forms)

NOTE: Offerors without all completed certifications as required in Appendices G. will not
be reviewed.

G. 1 FAR 52.203-17 - Contractor Employee Whistleblower Rights and Requirement To
Inform Employees of Whistleblower Rights. (Apr 2014)
(a) This contract and employees working on this contract will be subject to the whistleblower
rights and remedies in the pilot program on Contractor employee whistleblower protections
established at 41 U.S.C. 4712 by section 828 of the National Defense Authorization Act for
Fiscal Year 2013 (Pub. L. 112-239) and FAR 3.908.

(b) The Contractor shall inform its employees in writing, in the predominant language of the
workforce, of employee whistleblower rights and protections under 41 U.S.C. 4712, as described
in section 3.908 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation.

(c) The Contractor shall insert the substance of this clause, including this paragraph (c), in all
subcontracts over the simplified acquisition threshold.

 Certification G.1

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No



G.2 FAR 52.204-19 – Incorporation by Reference of Representations and Certifications. (Dec
2014)

The Contractor’s representations and certifications, including those completed electronically via the
System for Award Management (SAM), are incorporated by reference into the contract.
                                           (End of clause)

 Certification G.2

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No
G. 3 FAR 52.204-7 -- System for Award Management. (Oct 2016)


(a) Definitions. As used in this provision—


“Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) indicator” means a four-character suffix to the unique entity
identifier. The suffix is assigned at the discretion of the commercial, nonprofit, or Government
entity to establish additional System for Award Management records for identifying alternative EFT
accounts (see subpart 32.11) for the same entity.


“Registered in the System for Award Management (SAM) database” means that—
       (1) The Offeror has entered all mandatory information, including the unique entity identifier
       and the EFT indicator, if applicable, the Commercial and Government Entity (CAGE) code,
       as well as data required by the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of
       2006 (see subpart 4.14), into the SAM database;
       (2) The offeror has completed the Core, Assertions, and Representations and Certification,
       and Points of contact sections of the registration in the SAM database;
       (3) The Government has validated all mandatory data fields, to include validation of the
       Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The
       Offeror will be required to provide consent for TIN validation to the Government as a part
       of the SAM registration process.
       (4) The Government has marked the record “Active”.


“Unique entity identifier” means a number or other identifier used to identify a specific
commercial, nonprofit, or Government entity. See www.sam.gov for the designated entity for
establishing unique entity identifiers.


(b)
       (1) By submission of an Offer, the offeror acknowledges the requirement that a prospective
       awardee shall be registered in the SAM database prior to award, during performance, and
       through final payment of any contract, basic agreement, basic ordering agreement, or
       blanket purchasing agreement resulting from this solicitation.
       (2) The Offeror shall enter, in the block with its name and address on the cover page of its
       offer, the annotation “Unique Entity Identifier” followed by the unique entity identifier that
        identifies the Offeror’s name and address exactly as stated in the offer. The Offeror also
        shall enter its EFT indicator, if applicable. The unique entity identifier will be used by the
        Contracting Officer to verify that the Offeror is registered in the SAM database.


(c) If the Offeror does not have a unique entity identifier, it should contact the entity designated at
www.sam.gov for establishment of the unique entity identifier directly to obtain one. The Offeror
should be prepared to provide the following information:
        (1) Company legal business name.
        (2) Trade style, doing business, or other name by which your entity is commonly
        recognized.
        (3) Company physical street address, city, state and Zip Code.
        (4) Company mailing address, city, state and Zip Code (if separate from physical).
        (5) Company telephone number.
        (6) Date the company was started.
        (7) Number of employees at your location.
        (8) Chief executive officer/key manager.
        (9) Line of business (industry).
        (10) Company Headquarters name and address (reporting relationship within your entity).


(d) If the Offeror does not become registered in the SAM database in the time prescribed by the
Contracting Officer, the Contracting Officer will proceed to award to the next otherwise successful
registered Offeror.


(e) Processing time, which normally takes 48 hours, should be taken into consideration when
registering. Offerors who are not registered should consider applying for registration immediately
upon receipt of this solicitation.


(f) Offerors may obtain information on registration at https://www.acquisition.gov.
                                           (End of Provision)


Certification G.3
Will the offeror be registered in the SAM Database prior to award? XYes             No



G.4 SBA Company Registry
All offerors to the SBIR program are required to register at the SBA Company Registry
(http://sbir.gov/registration) prior to application submission. At the bottom of section G.2 of the
proposal, offerors are required to attach a .pdf FILE of the SBIR.gov SBC Registration Control
ID Form as proof of registration in this section of the proposal. Proposals that do not include
the .pdf file will be returned without review. See below a picture of a blank SBIR.gov
Registration Control ID Form that offerors will complete, save as a .pdf FILE, and include within
the proposal.




Notes: Completed registrations will receive a unique SBC Control ID and .pdf file. If previously
registered, offerors are still required to attach proof of registration. The SBA Company Registry
recommends verification with SAM, but a SAM account is not required to complete the
registration. In order to be verified with SAM, your email address must match one of the contacts
in SAM. If unsure if what is listed in SAM for your company, offerors may verify the
information on the SAM site. Confirmation of a company's DUNS is necessary to verify an
offeror’s email address in SAM.


Follow these steps listed below to register and attach proof of registration to the proposal.


a. Navigate to the SBA Company Registry (http://sbir.gov/registration).
b. If you are a previous SBIR awardee from any agency, search for your small business by
Company Name, EIN/Tax ID, DUNS, or Existing SBIR Contract/Grant Number in the search
fields provided. Identify your company and click “Proceed to Registration”.
c. If you are a first time applicant, click the New to the SBIR Program
(http://sbir.gov/firm_user_register) link on lower right of registry screen.
d. Fill out the required information on the “Basic Information” and “Eligibility Statement”
screens.
e. Press “Complete Registration” on the lower right of the “Eligibility Statement” screen and
follow all instructions.
f. Download and save your SBA registry PDF locally. The name will be in the format of
SBC_123456789.pdf, where SBC_123456789 (9 digit number) is your firm’s SBC Control ID.




 Certification G.4


 Attach the pdf. FILE for the SBIR.gov SBC Registration Control ID Form here: see
 note below attachment.
NOTE: The company name has changed to BOULDER LEARNING, INC.
G.5. SBIR Funding Agreement Certification

All small businesses are required to complete the below certification form in order to be selected
for an SBIR award. This includes checking all of the boxes and having an authorized officer of
the awardee sign and date the certification each time it is requested. Proposals that do not include
the completed certification will be returned without review.

 Certification G.5

 Please read carefully the following certification statements. The Federal government relies on
 the information to determine whether the business is eligible for a Small Business Innovation
 Research (SBIR) Program award. A similar certification will be used to ensure continued
 compliance with specific program requirements during the life of the funding agreement. The
 definitions for the terms used in this certification are set forth in the Small Business Act, SBA
 regulations (13 C.F.R. Part 121), the SBIR Policy Directive and also any statutory and
 regulatory provisions referenced in those authorities.

 If the funding agreement officer believes that the business may not meet certain eligibility
 requirements at the time of award, they are required to file a size protest with the U.S. Small
 Business Administration (SBA), who will determine eligibility. At that time, SBA will request
 further clarification and supporting documentation in order to assist in the verification of any
 of the information provided as part of a protest. If the funding agreement officer believes, after
 award, that the business is not meeting certain funding agreement requirements, the agency
 may request further clarification and supporting documentation in order to assist in the
 verification of any of the information provided.

 Even if correct information has been included in other materials submitted to the Federal
 government, any action taken with respect to this certification does not affect the
 Government’s right to pursue criminal, civil or administrative remedies for incorrect or
 incomplete information given in the certification. Each person signing this certification may
 be prosecuted if they have provided false information.

 The undersigned has reviewed, verified and certifies that (all boxes must be checked):

     (1) The business concern meets the ownership and control requirements set forth in 13
         C.F.R. §121.702.

     (2) XYes     No

 (2) If a corporation, all corporate documents (articles of incorporation and any amendments,
 articles of conversion, by-laws and amendments, shareholder meeting minutes showing
 director elections, shareholder meeting minutes showing officer elections, organizational
 meeting minutes, all issued stock certificates, stock ledger, buy-sell agreements, stock transfer
 agreements, voting agreements, and documents relating to stock options, including the right to
convert non-voting stock or debentures into voting stock) evidence that it meets the ownership
and control requirements set forth in 13 C.F.R. §121.702.

XYes       No     N/A Explain why N/A:

(3) If a partnership, the partnership agreement evidences that it meets the ownership and
control requirements set forth in 13 C.F.R. §121.702.

   Yes      No         XN/A Explain why N/A: It is not a partnership.

(4) If a limited liability company, the articles of organization and any amendments, and
operating agreement and amendments, evidence that it meets the ownership and control
requirements set forth in 13 C.F.R. §121.702.

   Yes      No         XN/A Explain why N/A: It is not an LLC.

(5) The birth certificates, naturalization papers, or passports show that any individuals it relies
upon to meet the eligibility requirements are U.S. citizens or permanent resident aliens in the
United States.

XYes       No     N/A Explain why N/A:

(6) It has no more than 500 employees, including the employees of its affiliates.

XYes     No

(7) SBA has not issued a size determination currently in effect finding that this business
concern exceeds the 500 employee size standard.

XYes     No

(8) During the performance of the award, the principal investigator will spend more than one
half of his/her time as an employee of the awardee or has requested and received a written
deviation from this requirement from the funding agreement officer.

XYes      No      Deviation approved in writing by funding agreement officer: %

(9) All, essentially equivalent work, or a portion of the work proposed under this project
(check the applicable line):

X Has not been submitted for funding by another Federal agency.

    Has been submitted for funding by another Federal agency but has not been funded under
any other Federal grant, contract, subcontract or other transaction.
     A portion has been funded by another grant, contract, or subcontract as described in detail
in the proposal and approved in writing by the funding agreement officer.

(10) During the performance of award, it will perform the applicable percentage of work
unless a deviation from this requirement is approved in writing by the funding agreement
officer (check the applicable line and fill in if needed):

XSBIR Phase I: at least two-thirds (66 2/3%) of the research.

    Deviation approved in writing by the funding agreement officer: %

(11) During performance of award, the research/research and development will be performed
in the United States unless a deviation is approved in writing by the funding agreement officer.

XYes      No      Waiver has been granted

(12) During performance of award, the research/research and development will be performed
at my facilities with my employees, except as otherwise indicated in the SBIR application and
approved in the funding agreement.

XYes     No

(13) It has registered itself on SBA’s database as majority-owned by venture capital operating
companies, hedge funds or private equity firms.

Yes XNo

  N/A Explain why N/A:

(14) It is a Covered Small Business Concern (a small business concern that: (a) was not
majority- owned by multiple venture capital operating companies (VCOCs), hedge funds, or
private equity firms on the date on which it submitted an application in response to an SBIR
solicitation; and (b) on the date of the SBIR award, which is made more than 9 months after
the closing date of the solicitation, is majority-owned by multiple venture capital operating
companies, hedge funds, or private equity firms).

  Yes XNo

X It will notify the Federal agency immediately if all or a portion of the work authorized
and funded under this award is subsequently funded by another Federal agency.

X I understand that the information submitted may be given to Federal, State and local
agencies for determining violations of law and other purposes.

XI am an officer of the business concern authorized to represent it and sign this
certification on its behalf. By signing this certification, I am representing on my own
 behalf, and on behalf of the business concern that the information provided in this
 certification, the application, and all other information submitted in connection with this
 application, is true and correct as of the date of submission. I acknowledge that any
 intentional or negligent misrepresentation of the information contained in this
 certification may result in criminal, civil or administrative sanctions, including but not
 limited to: (1) fines, restitution and/or imprisonment under 18 U.S.C. §1001; (2) treble
 damages and civil penalties under the False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §3729 et seq.); (3)
 double damages and civil penalties under the Program Fraud Civil Remedies Act (31
 U.S.C. §3801 et seq.); (4) civil recovery of award funds, (5) suspension and/or debarment
 from all Federal procurement and nonprocurement transactions (FAR Subpart 9.4 or 2
 C.F.R. part 180); and (6) other administrative penalties including termination of
 SBIR/STTR awards.

                                                                          Date02/29/2020/_
 Signature                                                                 /
 Print Name John Peter Ramo
  Title CEO
  Business Name Boulder Learning Inc.




G.6 North American Industry Classification System Code (NAICS) and DUNS Numbers

 Certification G.6

 This solicitation assumes North American Industry Classification System Code
 (NAICS) 541720 – Research and Development in the Social Sciences and
 Humanities. The offeror’s SAM registration must include a self-certification that
 they are a Small Business under their chosen NAICS code. If the offeror is
 submitting their proposal under a different NAICS code, please provide it here:
 ______________

 Provide your DUNS number:
 791197622




G.7 Additional Data

The next four (4) items are for statistical purposes only.
 Certification G.7

 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged SBC Certification –
 Does the offeror qualify as a socially and economically disadvantaged SBC and meet the
 definition as stated in this program solicitation?
    Yes XNo

 Woman-owned SBC Certification –
 Does the offeror qualify as a woman-owned SBC and meet the definition as stated in this
 program solicitation?
    Yes XNo

 HUBZone-owned SBC Certification –
 Does the offeror qualify as a HUBZone-owned SBC and meet the definition as stated in this
 solicitation?
    Yes XNo

 The website listed below contains information about the SBA’s HUBZone program:
 http://www.sba.gov/hubzone/

 Service Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business Certification –
 Does the offeror qualify as a Service Disabled Veteran Owned Small Business?
   Yes XNo




G.8 Manufacturing-Related Project Certification

This certification will serve as a tie-breaker.

 Certification G.8

 If R/R&D from an eventual Phase II award leads to a completed product or tool, is it
 possible that this product will be manufactured (e.g. production) on a wide scale basis?
    YesXNo
 In cases where there is a tie in the award selection process, ED will give priority to
 projects that are manufacturing-related. This “tie-breaker” specification allows the ED
 program to apply an additional preference without compromising the quality standards
 or established criteria of the program.
G.9 Disclosure Permission Statement

 Certification G.9

 Will the offeror permit the Government to disclose the title and technical abstract page of
 the proposed project, plus the name, address, and telephone number of the corporate official
 of the offeror’s firm, if the proposal does not result in an award, to concerns that may be
 interested in contacting you for further information?
 XYes No


G.10 Legend for Proprietary Information
Information contained in unsuccessful proposals will remain the property of the offeror. The
Government may, however, retain copies of all proposals. Public release of information in any
proposal submitted will be subject to existing statutory and regulatory requirements.

If proprietary information provided by an offeror in a proposal constitutes a trade secret, proprietary
commercial or financial information, confidential personal information, or data affecting national
security, it will be treated in confidence to the extent permitted by law. This information must be
clearly marked by the offeror with the term "confidential proprietary information” and the following
legend must appear in this section of the proposal:




 Certification G.10

 “These data shall not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated,
 used, or disclosed in whole or in part for any purpose other than evaluation of this
 proposal. If a contract is awarded to this offeror as a result of (or in connection with) the
 submission of these data, the Government shall have the right to duplicate, use, or
 disclose the data to the extent provided in the contract and pursuant to applicable law.
 This restriction does not limit the Government’s right to use information contained in the
 data if it is obtained from another source without restriction. The data subject to this
 restriction are contained in pages (insert page number here) of this proposal.”
 XYes No


The use of any other legend is unacceptable to the Government and may constitute grounds for
removing the proposal from further consideration without assuming any liability for inadvertent
disclosure. The Government will limit dissemination of such information to/within official
channels.

G.11 FAR 52.204-8 -- Annual Representations and Certifications. (Oct 2016)

(a)
       (1) The North American Industry classification System (NAICS) code for this acquisition
       is 611710.
       (2) The small business size standard is $16.5M.
       (3) The small business size standard for a concern which submits an offer in its own
       name, other than on a construction or service contract, but which proposes to furnish a
       product which it did not itself manufacture, is 500 employees.
(b)
       (1) If the provision at 52.204-7, System for Award Management, is included in this
       solicitation, paragraph (d) of this provision applies.
       (2) If the provision at 52.204-7 is not included in this solicitation, and the offeror is
       currently registered in the System for Award Management (SAM), and has completed the
       Representations and Certifications section of SAM electronically, the offeror may choose
       to use paragraph (d) of this provision instead of completing the corresponding individual
       representations and certification in the solicitation. The offeror shall indicate which
       option applies by checking one of the following boxes:
                [_] (i) Paragraph (d) applies.
                [X] (ii) Paragraph (d) does not apply and the offeror has completed the individual
                representations and certifications in the solicitation.
(c)
       (1) The following representations or certifications in SAM are applicable to this
       solicitation as indicated:
               (i) 52.203-2, Certificate of Independent Price Determination. This provision
               applies to solicitations when a firm-fixed-price contract or fixed-price contract
               with economic price adjustment is contemplated, unless—
                        (A) The acquisition is to be made under the simplified acquisition
                        procedures in Part 13;
                        (B) The solicitation is a request for technical proposals under two-step
                        sealed bidding procedures; or
                        (C) The solicitation is for utility services for which rates are set by law or
                        regulation.
               (ii) 52.203-11, Certification and Disclosure Regarding Payments to Influence
               Certain Federal Transactions. This provision applies to solicitations expected to
               exceed $150,000.
               (iii) 52.204-3, Taxpayer Identification. This provision applies to solicitations that
               do not include the provision at 52.204-7, System for Award Management.
               (iv) 52.204-5, Women-Owned Business (Other Than Small Business). This
               provision applies to solicitations that—
         (A) Are not set aside for small business concerns;
         (B) Exceed the simplified acquisition threshold; and
         (C) Are for contracts that will be performed in the United States or its
         outlying areas.
(v) 52.209-2, Prohibition on Contracting with Inverted Domestic Corporations—
Representation.
(vi) 52.209-5; Certification Regarding Responsibility Matters. This provision
applies to solicitations where the contract value is expected to exceed the
simplified acquisition threshold.
(vii) 52.209-11, Representation by Corporations Regarding Delinquent Tax
Liability or a Felony Conviction under any Federal Law. This provision applies to
all solicitations.
(viii) 52.214-14, Place of Performance--Sealed Bidding. This provision applies to
invitations for bids except those in which the place of performance is specified by
the Government.
(ix) 52.215-6, Place of Performance. This provision applies to solicitations unless
the place of performance is specified by the Government.
(x) 52.219-1, Small Business Program Representations (Basic & Alternate I). This
provision applies to solicitations when the contract will be performed in the
United States or its outlying areas.
         (A) The basic provision applies when the solicitations are issued by other
         than DoD, NASA, and the Coast Guard.
         (B) The provision with its Alternate I applies to solicitations issued by
         DoD, NASA, or the Coast Guard.
(xi) 52.219-2, Equal Low Bids. This provision applies to solicitations when
contracting by sealed bidding and the contract will be performed in the United
States or its outlying areas.
(xii) 52.222-22, Previous Contracts and Compliance Reports. This provision
applies to solicitations that include the clause at 52.222-26, Equal Opportunity.
(xiii) 52.222-25, Affirmative Action Compliance. This provision applies to
solicitations, other than those for construction, when the solicitation includes the
clause at 52.222-26, Equal Opportunity.
(xiv) 52.222-38, Compliance with Veterans' Employment Reporting
Requirements. This provision applies to solicitations when it is anticipated the
contract award will exceed the simplified acquisition threshold and the contract is
not for acquisition of commercial items.
(xv) 52.222-57, Representation Regarding Compliance with Labor Laws
(Executive Order 13673). This provision applies to solicitations expected to
exceed $50 million which are issued from October 25, 2016 through April 24,
2020, and solicitations expected to exceed $500,000, which are issued after April
24, 2020.
(xvi) 52.223-1, Biobased Product Certification. This provision applies to
solicitations that require the delivery or specify the use of USDA-designated
       items; or include the clause at 52.223-2, Affirmative Procurement of Biobased
       Products Under Service and Construction Contracts.
       (xvii) 52.223-4, Recovered Material Certification. This provision applies to
       solicitations that are for, or specify the use of, EPA- designated items.
       (xviii) 52.225-2, Buy American Certificate. This provision applies to solicitations
       containing the clause at 52.225-1.
       (xix) 52.225-4, Buy American--Free Trade Agreements--Israeli Trade Act
       Certificate. (Basic, Alternates I, II, and III.) This provision applies to solicitations
       containing the clause at 52.225- 3.
                (A) If the acquisition value is less than $25,000, the basic provision
                applies.
                (B) If the acquisition value is $25,000 or more but is less than $50,000, the
                provision with its Alternate I applies.
                (C) If the acquisition value is $50,000 or more but is less than $77,533, the
                provision with its Alternate II applies.
                (D) If the acquisition value is $79,507 or more but is less than $100,000,
                the provision with its Alternate III applies.
       (xx) 52.225-6, Trade Agreements Certificate. This provision applies to
       solicitations containing the clause at 52.225-5.
       (xxi) 52.225-20, Prohibition on Conducting Restricted Business Operations in
       Sudan--Certification. This provision applies to all solicitations.
       (xxii) 52.225-25, Prohibition on Contracting with Entities Engaging in Certain
       Activities or Transactions Relating to Iran—Representation and Certification.
       This provision applies to all solicitations.
       (xxiii) 52.226-2, Historically Black College or University and Minority Institution
       Representation. This provision applies to solicitations for research, studies,
       supplies, or services of the type normally acquired from higher educational
       institutions.
(2) The following representations or certifications are applicable as indicated by the
Contracting Officer:
       [Contracting Officer check as appropriate.]
       [√] (i) 52.204-17, Ownership or Control of Offeror.
       [√] (ii) 52.204-20, Predecessor of Offeror.
       [N/A] (iii) 52.222-18, Certification Regarding Knowledge of Child Labor for
       Listed End Products.
       [N/A] (iv) 52.222-48, Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor
       Standards to Contracts for Maintenance, Calibration, or Repair of Certain
       Equipment--Certification.
       [N/A] (v) 52.222-52 Exemption from Application of the Service Contract Labor
       Standards to Contracts for Certain Services--Certification.
       [N/A] (vi) 52.223-9, with its Alternate I, Estimate of Percentage of Recovered
       Material Content for EPA-Designated Products (Alternate I only).
       [N/A] (vii) 52.227-6, Royalty Information.
                        ___ (A) Basic.
                        ___ (B) Alternate I.
                [N/A] (viii) 52.227-15, Representation of Limited Rights Data and Restricted
                Computer Software.
(d) The offeror has completed the annual representations and certifications electronically via the
SAM Web site accessed through https://www.acquisition.gov . After reviewing the SAM
database information, the offeror verifies by submission of the offer that the representations and
certifications currently posted electronically that apply to this solicitation as indicated in
paragraph (c) of this provision have been entered or updated within the last 12 months, are
current, accurate, complete, and applicable to this solicitation (including the business size
standard applicable to the NAICS code referenced for this solicitation), as of the date of this
offer and are incorporated in this offer by reference (see FAR 4.1201); except for the changes
identified below [offeror to insert changes, identifying change by clause number, title, date].
These amended representation(s) and/or certification(s) are also incorporated in this offer and are
current, accurate, and complete as of the date of this offer.
FAR Clause             Title                 Date                  Change




Any changes provided by the offeror are applicable to this solicitation only, and do not result in
an update to the representations and certifications posted on SAM.
                                        (End of Provision)

 Certification G.11

 The offeror affirms provision 52.204 above.
 XYes No




G.12 FAR 52.222-54 – Employment Eligibility Verification (Oct 2015)
(a) Definitions. As used in this clause—

“Commercially available off-the-shelf (COTS) item”—
     (1) Means any item of supply that is—
             (i) A commercial item (as defined in paragraph (1) of the definition at 2.101);
            (ii) Sold in substantial quantities in the commercial marketplace; and
            (iii) Offered to the Government, without modification, in the same form in which
            it is sold in the commercial marketplace; and
       (2) Does not include bulk cargo, as defined in 46 U.S.C. 40102(4) such as agricultural
       products and petroleum products. Per 46 CFR 525.1(c)(2), “bulk cargo” means cargo that
       is loaded and carried in bulk onboard ship without mark or count, in a loose unpackaged
       form, having homogenous characteristics. Bulk cargo loaded into intermodal equipment,
       except LASH or Seabee barges, is subject to mark and count and, therefore, ceases to be
       bulk cargo.

“Employee assigned to the contract” means an employee who was hired after November 6, 1986
(after November 27, 2009, in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands), who is
directly performing work, in the United States, under a contract that is required to include the
clause prescribed at 22.1803. An employee is not considered to be directly performing work
under a contract if the employee—
         (1) Normally performs support work, such as indirect or overhead functions; and
         (2) Does not perform any substantial duties applicable to the contract.

“Subcontract” means any contract, as defined in 2.101, entered into by a subcontractor to furnish
supplies or services for performance of a prime contract or a subcontract. It includes but is not
limited to purchase orders, and changes and modifications to purchase orders.

“Subcontractor” means any supplier, distributor, vendor, or firm that furnishes supplies or
services to or for a prime Contractor or another subcontractor.

“United States,” as defined in 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(38), means the 50 States, the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the
U.S. Virgin Islands.

(b) Enrollment and verification requirements.
       (1) If the Contractor is not enrolled as a Federal Contractor in E-Verify at time of contract
       award, the Contractor shall—
                (i) Enroll. Enroll as a Federal Contractor in the E-Verify program within 30
                calendar days of contract award;
                (ii) Verify all new employees. Within 90 calendar days of enrollment in the E-
                Verify program, begin to use E-Verify to initiate verification of employment
                eligibility of all new hires of the Contractor, who are working in the United
                States, whether or not assigned to the contract, within 3 business days after the
                date of hire (but see paragraph (b)(3) of this section); and
                (iii) Verify employees assigned to the contract. For each employee assigned to the
                contract, initiate verification within 90 calendar days after date of enrollment or
                within 30 calendar days of the employee’s assignment to the contract, whichever
                date is later (but see paragraph (b)(4) of this section).
       (2) If the Contractor is enrolled as a Federal Contractor in E-Verify at time of contract
       award, the Contractor shall use E-Verify to initiate verification of employment eligibility
       of—
         (i) All new employees.
                 (A) Enrolled 90 calendar days or more. The Contractor shall initiate
                 verification of all new hires of the Contractor, who are working in the
                 United States, whether or not assigned to the contract within 3 business
                 days after the date of hire (but see paragraph (b)(3) of this section); or
                 (B) Enrolled less than 90 calendar days. Within 90 calendar days after
                 enrollment as a Federal Contractor in E-Verify, the Contractor shall initiate
                 verification of all new hires of the Contractor, who are working in the
                 United States, whether or not assigned to the contract, within 3 business
                 days after the date of hire (but see paragraph (b)(3) of this section ); or
         (ii) Employees assigned to the contract. For each employee assigned to the
         contract, the Contractor shall initiate verification within 90 calendar days after
         date of contract award or within 30 days after assignment to the contract,
         whichever date is later (but see paragraph (b)(4) of this section).
(3) If the Contractor is an institution of higher education (as defined at 20 U.S.C.
1001(a)); a State or local government or the government of a Federally recognized Indian
tribe; or a surety performing under a takeover agreement entered into with a Federal
agency pursuant to a performance bond, the Contractor may choose to verify only
employees assigned to the contract, whether existing employees or new hires. The
Contractor shall follow the applicable verification requirements at (b)(1) or (b)(2),
respectively, except that any requirement for verification of new employees applies only
to new employees assigned to the contract.
(4) Option to verify employment eligibility of all employees. The Contractor may elect to
verify all existing employees hired after November 6, 1986 (after November 27, 2009, in
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands), rather than just those employees
assigned to the contract. The Contractor shall initiate verification for each existing
employee working in the United States who was hired after November 6, 1986 (after
November 27, 2009, in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands), within 180
calendar days of—
          (i) Enrollment in the E-Verify program; or
          (ii) Notification to E-Verify Operations of the Contractor’s decision to exercise
          this option, using the contact information provided in the E-Verify program
          Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).
(5) The Contractor shall comply, for the period of performance of this contract, with the
requirement of the E-Verify program MOU.
          (i) The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) or the Social Security
          Administration (SSA) may terminate the Contractor’s MOU and deny access to
          the E-Verify system in accordance with the terms of the MOU. In such case, the
          Contractor will be referred to a suspension or debarment official.
          (ii) During the period between termination of the MOU and a decision by the
          suspension or debarment official whether to suspend or debar, the Contractor is
          excused from its obligations under paragraph (b) of this clause. If the suspension
                 or debarment official determines not to suspend or debar the Contractor, then the
                 Contractor must reenroll in E-Verify.
(c) Web site. Information on registration for and use of the E-Verify program can be obtained via
the Internet at the Department of Homeland Security Web site: http://www.dhs.gov/E-Verify .
(d) Individuals previously verified. The Contractor is not required by this clause to perform
additional employment verification using E-Verify for any employee—
       (1) Whose employment eligibility was previously verified by the Contractor through the
        E-Verify program;
       (2) Who has been granted and holds an active U.S. Government security clearance for
        access to confidential, secret, or top secret information in accordance with the National
        Industrial Security Program Operating Manual; or
       (3) Who has undergone a completed background investigation and been issued credentials
        pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD) -12, Policy for a Common
        Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors.
(e) Subcontracts. The contractor shall include the requirements of this clause, including this
paragraph (e) (appropriately modified for identification of the parties), in each subcontract that—
        (1) Is for—
                 (i) Commercial or noncommercial services (except for commercial services that
                 are part of the purchase of a COTS item (or an item that would be a COTS item,
                 but for minor modifications), performed by the COTS provider, and are normally
                 provided for that COTS item); or
                 (ii) Construction;
         (2) Has a value of more than $3,500; and
         (3) Includes work performed in the United States.
                                            (End of Clause)

 Certification G.12

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No


G.13 FAR 52.233-2 -- Service of Protest. (Sep 2006)

 (a) Protests, as defined in section 33.101 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, that are filed
directly with an agency, and copies of any protests that are filed with the Government
Accountability Office (GAO), shall be served on the Contracting Officer (addressed as follows)
by obtaining written and dated acknowledgment of receipt from _Brandon Helding.

(b) The copy of any protest shall be received in the office designated above within one day of
filing a protest with the GAO.

                                        (End of Provision)
 Certification G.13

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No




G.14 FAR 52.233-3 -- Protest After Award. (Aug 1996)

 (a) Upon receipt of a notice of protest (as defined in FAR 33.101) or a determination that a
protest is likely (see FAR 33.102(d)), the Contracting Officer may, by written order to the
Contractor, direct the Contractor to stop performance of the work called for by this contract. The
order shall be specifically identified as a stop-work order issued under this clause. Upon receipt
of the order, the Contractor shall immediately comply with its terms and take all reasonable steps
to minimize the incurrence of costs allocable to the work covered by the order during the period
of work stoppage. Upon receipt of the final decision in the protest, the Contracting Officer shall
either --

       (1) Cancel the stop-work order; or

       (2) Terminate the work covered by the order as provided in the Default, or the
       Termination for Convenience of the Government, clause of this contract.

(b) If a stop-work order issued under this clause is canceled either before or after a final decision
in the protest, the Contractor shall resume work. The Contracting Officer shall make an equitable
adjustment in the delivery schedule or contract price, or both, and the contract shall be modified,
in writing, accordingly, if --

       (1) The stop-work order results in an increase in the time required for, or in the
       Contractor’s cost properly allocable to, the performance of any part of this contract; and

       (2) The Contractor asserts its right to an adjustment within 30 days after the end of the
       period of work stoppage; provided, that if the Contracting Officer decides the facts justify
       the action, the Contracting Officer may receive and act upon a proposal at any time
       before final payment under this contract.

(c) If a stop-work order is not canceled and the work covered by the order is terminated for the
convenience of the Government, the Contracting Officer shall allow reasonable costs resulting
from the stop-work order in arriving at the termination settlement.

(d) If a stop-work order is not canceled and the work covered by the order is terminated for
default, the Contracting Officer shall allow, by equitable adjustment or otherwise, reasonable
costs resulting from the stop-work order.
(e) The Government’s rights to terminate this contract at any time are not affected by action
taken under this clause.

(f) If, as the result of the Contractor’s intentional or negligent misstatement, misrepresentation,
or miscertification, a protest related to this contract is sustained, and the Government pays costs,
as provided in FAR 33.102(b)(2) or 33.104(h)(1), the Government may require the Contractor to
reimburse the Government the amount of such costs. In addition to any other remedy available,
and pursuant to the requirements of Subpart 32.6, the Government may collect this debt by
offsetting the amount against any payment due the Contractor under any contract between the
Contractor and the Government.

                                           (End of Clause)

 Certification G.14

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No


G. 15 FAR 52.233-4 -- Applicable Law for Breach of Contract Claim. (Oct 2004)

United States law will apply to resolve any claim of breach of this contract.

                                           (End of clause)

 Certification G.15

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No


G.16 EDAR 3452.209-70 Conflict of Interest Certification (MAY 2011)

 (a)(1) The contractor, subcontractor, employee, or consultant, by signing the form in this
 clause, certifies that, to the best of its knowledge and belief, there are no relevant facts or
 circumstances that could give rise to an organizational or personal conflict of interest, (
 see FAR Subpart 9.5 for organizational conflicts of interest) (or apparent conflict of
 interest), for the organization or any of its staff, and that the contractor, subcontractor,
 employee, or consultant has disclosed all such relevant information if such a conflict of
 interest appears to exist to a reasonable person with knowledge of the relevant facts (or if
 such a person would question the impartiality of the contractor, subcontractor, employee,
 or consultant). Conflicts may arise in the following situations:
       (i) Unequal access to information. A potential contractor, subcontractor,
       employee, or consultant has access to non-public information through its
       performance on a government contract.

       (ii) Biased ground rules. A potential contractor, subcontractor, employee,
       or consultant has worked, in one government contract, or program, on the
       basic structure or ground rules of another government contract.

       (iii) Impaired objectivity. A potential contractor, subcontractor, employee,
       or consultant, or member of their immediate family (spouse, parent, or
       child) has financial or other interests that would impair, or give the
       appearance of impairing, impartial judgment in the evaluation of
       government programs, in offering advice or recommendations to the
       government, or in providing technical assistance or other services to
       recipients of Federal funds as part of its contractual responsibility.
       “Impaired objectivity” includes but is not limited to the following
       situations that would cause a reasonable person with knowledge of the
       relevant facts to question a person's objectivity:

               (A) Financial interests or reasonably foreseeable financial interests
               in or in connection with products, property, or services that may be
               purchased by an educational agency, a person, organization, or
               institution in the course of implementing any program
               administered by the Department;

               (B) Significant connections to teaching methodologies or
               approaches that might require or encourage the use of specific
               products, property, or services; or

               (C) Significant identification with pedagogical or philosophical
               viewpoints that might require or encourage the use of a specific
               curriculum, specific products, property, or services.

(2) Offerors must provide the disclosure described above on any actual or
potential conflict of interest (or apparent conflict of interest) regardless of their
opinion that such a conflict or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of interest)
would not impair their objectivity.

(3) In a case in which an actual or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of
interest) is disclosed, the Department will take appropriate actions to eliminate or
address the actual or potential conflict, including but not limited to mitigating or
neutralizing the conflict, when appropriate, through such means as ensuring a
balance of views, disclosure with the appropriate disclaimers, or by restricting or
        modifying the work to be performed to avoid or reduce the conflict. In this clause,
        the term “potential conflict” means reasonably foreseeable conflict of interest.

(b) The contractor, subcontractor, employee, or consultant agrees that if “impaired
objectivity”, or an actual or potential conflict of interest (or apparent conflict of interest)
is discovered after the award is made, it will make a full disclosure in writing to the
contracting officer. This disclosure shall include a description of actions that the
contractor has taken or proposes to take to avoid, mitigate, or neutralize the actual or
potential conflict (or apparent conflict of interest).

(c) Remedies. The Government may terminate this contract for convenience, in whole or
in part, if it deems such termination necessary to avoid the appearance of a conflict of
interest. If the contractor was aware of a potential conflict of interest prior to award or
discovered an actual or potential conflict after award and did not disclose or
misrepresented relevant information to the contracting officer, the Government may
terminate the contract for default, or pursue such other remedies as may be permitted by
law or this contract. These remedies include imprisonment for up to five years for
violation of 18 U.S.C. 1001 and fines of up to $5000 for violation of 31 U.S.C. 3802.
Further remedies include suspension or debarment from contracting with the Federal
government. The contractor may also be required to reimburse the Department for costs
the Department incurs arising from activities related to conflicts of interest. An example
of such costs would be those incurred in processing Freedom of Information Act requests
related to a conflict of interest.

(d) In cases where remedies short of termination have been applied, the contractor,
subcontractor, employee, or consultant agrees to eliminate the organizational conflict of
interest, or mitigate it to the satisfaction of the contracting officer.

(e) The contractor further agrees to insert in any subcontract or consultant agreement
hereunder, provisions that conform substantially to the language of this clause, including
specific mention of potential remedies and this paragraph (e).

(f) Conflict of Interest Certification.

The offeror, [insert name of offeror], hereby certifies that, to the best of its knowledge
and belief, there are no present or currently planned interests (financial, contractual,
organizational, or otherwise) relating to the work to be performed under the contract or
task order resulting from Request for Proposal No. [insert number] that would create any
actual or potential conflict of interest (or apparent conflicts of interest) (including
conflicts of interest for immediate family members: spouses, parents, children) that
would impinge on its ability to render impartial, technically sound, and objective
assistance or advice or result in it being given an unfair competitive advantage. In this
clause, the term “potential conflict” means reasonably foreseeable conflict of interest.
 The offeror further certifies that it has and will continue to exercise due diligence in
 identifying and removing or mitigating, to the Government's satisfaction, such conflict of
 interest (or apparent conflict of interest).

 Offeror's Name_Boulder Learning, Inc. _________
 RFP/Contract No._ 91990020R0006


 Signature_                  ___________________
 Title__Principle Investigator/Methodologist__________________
 Date___2/29/20_________________

                                      (End of Provision)


G.17 EDAR 3452.209-71 Conflict of Interest (MAY 2011)


 (a)(1) The contractor, subcontractor, employee, or consultant, has certified that, to the
 best of its knowledge and belief, there are no relevant facts or circumstances that could
 give rise to an organizational or personal conflict of interest ( see FAR Subpart 9.5 for
 organizational conflicts of interest) (or apparent conflict of interest) for the organization
 or any of its staff, and that the contractor, subcontractor, employee, or consultant has
 disclosed all such relevant information if such a conflict of interest appears to exist to a
 reasonable person with knowledge of the relevant facts (or if such a person would
 question the impartiality of the contractor, subcontractor, employee, or consultant).
 Conflicts may arise in the following situations:

                (i) Unequal access to information —A potential contractor, subcontractor,
                employee, or consultant has access to non-public information through its
                performance on a government contract.

                (ii) Biased ground rules —A potential contractor, subcontractor,
                employee, or consultant has worked, in one government contract, or
                program, on the basic structure or ground rules of another government
                contract.

                (iii) Impaired objectivity —A potential contractor, subcontractor,
                employee, or consultant, or member of their immediate family (spouse,
                parent, or child) has financial or other interests that would impair, or give
                the appearance of impairing, impartial judgment in the evaluation of
                government programs, in offering advice or recommendations to the
                government, or in providing technical assistance or other services to
                recipients of Federal funds as part of its contractual responsibility.
               “Impaired objectivity” includes but is not limited to the following
               situations that would cause a reasonable person with knowledge of the
               relevant facts to question a person's objectivity:

                       (A) Financial interests or reasonably foreseeable financial interests
                       in or in connection with products, property, or services that may be
                       purchased by an educational agency, a person, organization, or
                       institution in the course of implementing any program
                       administered by the Department;

                       (B) Significant connections to teaching methodologies that might
                       require or encourage the use of specific products, property, or
                       services; or

                       (C) Significant identification with pedagogical or philosophical
                       viewpoints that might require or encourage the use of a specific
                       curriculum, specific products, property, or services.

       (2) Offerors must provide the disclosure described above on any actual or
       potential conflict (or apparent conflict of interest) of interest regardless of their
       opinion that such a conflict or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of interest)
       would not impair their objectivity.

       (3) In a case in which an actual or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of
       interest) is disclosed, the Department will take appropriate actions to eliminate or
       address the actual or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of interest), including
       but not limited to mitigating or neutralizing the conflict, when appropriate,
       through such means as ensuring a balance of views, disclosure with the
       appropriate disclaimers, or by restricting or modifying the work to be performed
       to avoid or reduce the conflict. In this clause, the term “potential conflict” means
       reasonably foreseeable conflict of interest.

(b) The contractor, subcontractor, employee, or consultant agrees that if “impaired
objectivity”, or an actual or potential conflict of interest (or apparent conflict of interest)
is discovered after the award is made, it will make a full disclosure in writing to the
contracting officer. This disclosure shall include a description of actions that the
contractor has taken or proposes to take, after consultation with the contracting officer, to
avoid, mitigate, or neutralize the actual or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of
interest).

(c) Remedies. The Government may terminate this contract for convenience, in whole or
in part, if it deems such termination necessary to avoid the appearance of a conflict of
interest. If the contractor was aware of a potential conflict of interest prior to award or
 discovered an actual or potential conflict (or apparent conflict of interest) after award and
 did not disclose or misrepresented relevant information to the contracting officer, the
 Government may terminate the contract for default, or pursue such other remedies as may
 be permitted by law or this contract. These remedies include imprisonment for up to five
 years for violation of 18 U.S.C. 1001 and fines of up to $5,000 for violation of 31 U.S.C.
 3802. Further remedies include suspension or debarment from contracting with the
 Federal government. The contractor may also be required to reimburse the Department
 for costs the Department incurs arising from activities related to conflicts of interest. An
 example of such costs would be those incurred in processing Freedom of Information Act
 requests related to a conflict of interest.

 (d) In cases where remedies short of termination have been applied, the contractor,
 subcontractor, employee, or consultant agrees to eliminate the organizational conflict of
 interest, or mitigate it to the satisfaction of the contracting officer.

 (e) The contractor further agrees to insert in any subcontract or consultant agreement
 hereunder, provisions that conform substantially to the language of this clause, including
 specific mention of potential remedies and this paragraph (e).

                                       (End of Clause)

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.

 XYes     No




G.18 EDAR 3452.239–72 DEPARTMENT SECURITY REQUIREMENTS (DEVIATION)


a) The contractor and its subcontractors shall comply with Department security policy
requirements as set forth in the "Bidder`s Security Package: Security Requirements for
Contractors Doing Business with the Department of Education" at
www.ed.gov/fund/contract/about/bsp.html.




(b) Contractor employees who will have access to proprietary or sensitive ED information
including “Controlled Unclassified Information” as defined in 32 CFR Part 2002, or ED IT
systems, systems maintained on behalf of ED, ED facilities or space, and/or perform duties in a
school or in a location where children are present, must undergo a personnel security screening
and a favorable determination and are subject to reinvestigation as described in the “Contractor
Vetting Security Requirements.” Compliance with these “Contractor Vetting Security
Requirements,” as amended, is required.


(c) The type of security investigation required to commence work on an ED contract is dictated
by the position designation determination assigned by ED. All ED contractor positions are
designated commensurate with their position risk/sensitivity, in accordance with Title 5 Code of
Federal Regulations (5 CFR 731.106) and OPM’s Position Designation Tool (PDT) located at:
https://pdt.nbis.mil/. The position designation determines the risk level and the corresponding
level of background investigations required.


(d) The contractor shall comply with all contractor position designations established by ED.


(e) The following are the contractor employee positions required under this contract and their
designated risk levels:


High Risk (HR):         (Not Applicable)
Moderate Risk (MR): X(Principal Investigator, Education Researcher)
Low Risk (LR):          (Not Applicable)




NOTES:

   •   The High Risk (HR) designation is not applicable for the ED/IES SBIR program.
   •   The Moderate Risk (MR) designation refers to individuals on the contract who are
       required to be cleared at Moderate risk if they work on the project 30 days or more, visit
       a school or come in contact with students, and have access to any personally identifiable
       information (PII) about the students.
   •   The Low Risk (LR) designation refers to individuals on the contract who are required to
       be cleared as Low risk if they work on the project 30 days or more and visit a school or
       come in contact with students, but do not have access to any personally identifiable
       information (PII) about the students.
   •   If individuals who perform work on the contract do not work for a total of 30 days, do not
       go to a school, come in contact with a student, or do not have access to PII, then NO
       clearance is needed.
Position Designation Records (PDRs) for ED/IES SBIR Contracts

     Personnel Position               Description of Relevant Responsibilities             Risk
                                                                                           Level
 Principal Investigator         Leads the managerial team in planning, conducting,         MR
                                monitoring, and evaluating the work. Has access to
                                sensitive but unclassified or Privacy Act-protected
                                information.

 Education Researcher           Prepares, programs, and/or analyzes data that              MR
 (Analyst, Programmer,          include sensitive but unclassified or Privacy Act-
 Statistician, Research         protected information.
 Assistant)

 Data Collector                 Visits schools and administers an electronic survey        MR
                                to students (but does not have access to student
                                data).




(f) For performance-based contracts where ED has not identified required labor categories for
contractor positions, ED considers the risk sensitivity of the services to be performed and the
access to ED facilities and systems that will be required during performance, to determine the
uniform contractor position risk level designation for all contractor employees who will be
providing services under the contract. The uniform contractor position risk level designation
applicable to this performance-based contract is:


(Moderate)


(g) Only U.S. citizens will be eligible for employment on contracts requiring a Moderate
Risk/Public Trust, High Risk/Public Trust, or a National Security designation.


(h) Permanent resident aliens may be eligible for employment on contracts requiring Low Risk/
Public Trust access.
(i) An approved waiver, in accordance with “Contractor Vetting Security Requirements” is
required for any exception to the requirements of paragraphs (h) and (i) above.


(j) The Contractor shall-


           (1) Comply with the Principal Office (PO) processing requirements for personnel
               security screening,
           (2) Ensure that no contractor employee is placed in a higher risk position than for
               which he or she is approved,
           (3) Ensure contractor employees submit required security forms for reinvestigation in
               accordance with the timeframes set forth in the “Contractor Vetting Security
               Requirements,”
           (4) Report to the COR any information (i.e., personal conduct, criminal conduct,
               financial difficulties, etc.) that would raise a concern about the suitability of a
               contractor or whether a contractor employee’s continued employment would
               promote the efficiency of the service or violate the public trust,
           (5) Protect sensitive and Privacy Act-protected, including “Controlled Unclassified
               Information” as defined in 32 CFR Part 2002, from unauthorized access, use or
               misuse by its contractor employees, prevent unauthorized access by others, and
               report any instances of unauthorized access, use or misuse to the COR,
           (6) Report to the COR within two business days any removal of a contractor
               employee from a contract; or within one business day if removed for cause,
           (7) Return a PIV ID to the COR within seven business days of the contractor
               employee’s departure,
           (8) Report to COR of any job activities that contractor employee has brought to their
               attention that they believe could result in a change in the contractor employee’s
               position or the need for increased security access; and
           (9) Ensure that any ED information processed, stored, or transmitted by the
               contractor will not be used or redistributed except as specified in the contract.


(k) Performance of this contract will [X] will not [ ] involve access to ED IT systems and/or
systems maintained on behalf of ED. For contracts that require access to ED IT systems and/or
systems maintained on behalf of ED, the Information Security Categorization applicable to each
security objective has been determined to be:


Confidentiality: [ ] Low [X] Moderate [ ] High    (Contracting Officer to complete)
Integrity: [ ] Low [X] Moderate [ ] High          (Contracting Officer to complete)
Availability: [ ] Low [X] Moderate [ ] High      (Contracting Officer to complete)
Overall Risk Level: [ ] Low [X] Moderate [ ] High (Contracting Officer to complete)
(l) Performance of this contract [X] does involve [ ] does not involve Personally Identifiable
information (PII) or “Controlled Unclassified Information” as defined in 32 CFR Part 2002. The
Confidentiality Impact Level of such information has been determined to be:
[ ] Not Applicable [ ] Low [X] Moderate [ ] High.


(m) Failure to comply with any of the personnel, privacy, and cyber security requirements may
result in a termination of the contract for default or cause.




                                         (End of Clause)




                                          (End of Clause)


 Certification G.18
 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No
G.19 FAR 52.204-10 – Reporting Executive Compensation and First-Tier Subcontract
Awards (Oct 2016)
(a) Definitions. As used in this clause:

“Executive” means officers, managing partners, or any other employees in management
positions.

“First-tier subcontract” means a subcontract awarded directly by the Contractor for the purpose
of acquiring supplies or services (including construction) for performance of a prime contract. It
does not include the Contractor’s supplier agreements with vendors, such as long-term
arrangements for materials or supplies that would benefit multiple contracts and/or the costs of
which are normally applied to a Contractor’s general and administrative expenses or indirect
cost.

“Month of award” means the month in which a contract is signed by the Contracting Officer or
the month in which a first-tier subcontract is signed by the Contractor.

“Total compensation” means the cash and noncash dollar value earned by the executive during
the Contractor’s preceding fiscal year and includes the following (for more information see 17
CFR 229.402(c)(2)):
       (1) Salary and bonus.
       (2) Awards of stock, stock options, and stock appreciation rights. Use the dollar amount
        recognized for financial statement reporting purposes with respect to the fiscal year in
        accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards
        Codification (FASB ASC) 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation.
       (3) Earnings for services under non-equity incentive plans. This does not include group
        life, health, hospitalization or medical reimbursement plans that do not discriminate in
        favor of executives, and are available generally to all salaried employees.
       (4) Change in pension value. This is the change in present value of defined benefit and
        actuarial pension plans.
       (5) Above-market earnings on deferred compensation which is not tax-qualified.
       (6) Other compensation, if the aggregate value of all such other compensation (e.g.,
        severance, termination payments, value of life insurance paid on behalf of the employee,
        perquisites or property) for the executive exceeds $10,000.

(b) Section 2(d)(2) of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 (Pub. L.
No. 109-282), as amended by section 6202 of the Government Funding Transparency Act of
2008 (Pub. L. 110-252), requires the Contractor to report information on subcontract awards.
The law requires all reported information be made public, therefore, the Contractor is
responsible for notifying its subcontractors that the required information will be made public.

(c) Nothing in this clause required the disclosure of classified information.
(d)
      (1) Executive compensation of the prime contractor. As a part of its annual registration
      requirement in the System for Award Management (SAM) database (FAR provision
      52.204-7), the Contractor shall report the names and total compensation of each of the
      five most highly compensated executives for its preceding completed fiscal year, if—
              (i) In the Contractor’s preceding fiscal year, the Contractor received—
                       (A) 80 percent or more of its annual gross revenues from Federal
                        contracts (and subcontracts), loans, grants (and subgrants), cooperative
                        agreements, and other forms of Federal financial assistance; and
                       (B) $25,000,000 or more in annual gross revenues from Federal contracts
                        (and subcontracts), loans, grants (and subgrants), cooperative agreements,
                        and other forms of Federal financial assistance; and
              (ii) The public does not have access to information about the compensation of the
              executives through periodic reports filed under section 13(a) or 15(d) of the
              Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m(a), 78o(d)) or section 6104 of
              the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. (To determine if the public has access to the
              compensation information, see the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission total
              compensation filings at http://www.sec.gov/answers/execomp.htm.)
      (2) First-tier subcontract information. Unless otherwise directed by the contracting
      officer, or as provided in paragraph (g) of this clause, by the end of the month following
      the month of award of a first-tier subcontract with a value of $30,000 or more, the
      Contractor shall report the following information at http://www.fsrs.gov for that first tier
      subcontract. (The Contractor shall follow the instruction at http://www.fsrs.gov to report
      the data.)
              (i) Unique entity identifier for the subcontractor receiving the award and for the
              subcontractor’s parent company, if the subcontractor has a parent company.
              (ii) Name of the subcontractor.
              (iii) Amount of the subcontract award.
              (iv) Date of the subcontract award.
              (v) A description of the products or services (including construction) being
              provided under the subcontract, including the overall purpose and expected
              outcomes or results of the subcontract.
              (vi) Subcontract number (the subcontract number assigned by the Contractor).
              (vii) Subcontractor’s physical address including street address, city, state, and
              country. Also include the nine-digit zip code and congressional district.
              (viii) Subcontractor’s primary performance location including street address, city,
              state, and country. Also include the nine-digit zip code and congressional district.
              (ix) The prime contract number, and order number if applicable.
              (x) Awarding agency name and code.
              (xi) Funding agency name and code.
              (xii) Government contracting office code.
              (xiii) Treasury account symbol (TAS) as reported in FPDS.
               (xiv) The applicable North American Industry Classification System code
               (NAICS).
       (3) Executive compensation of the first-tier subcontractor. Unless otherwise directed by
       the Contracting Officer, by the end of the month following the month of award of a first-
       tier subcontract with a value of $30,000 or more, and annually thereafter (calculated from
       the prime contract award date), the Contractor shall report the names and total
       compensation of each of the five most highly compensated executives for that first-tier
       subcontractor for the first-tier subcontractor’s preceding completed fiscal year at
       https://www.fsrs.gov , if—
               (i) In the subcontractor’s preceding fiscal year, the subcontractor received—
                        (A) 80 percent or more of its annual gross revenues from Federal contracts
                        (and subcontracts), loans, grants (and subgrants), cooperative agreements,
                        and other forms of Federal financial assistance; and
                        (B) $25,000,000 or more in annual gross revenues from Federal contracts
                        (and subcontracts), loans, grants (and subgrants), cooperative agreements
                        and other forms of Federal financial assistance; and
               (ii) The public does not have access to information about the compensation of the
               executives through periodic reports filed under section 13(a) or 15(d) of the
               Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78m(a), 78o(d)) or section 6104 of
               the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. (To determine if the public has access to the
               compensation information, see the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission total
               compensation filings at http://www.sec.gov/answers/execomp.htm.)

(e) The Contractor shall not split or break down first-tier subcontract awards to a value less than
$30,000 to avoid the reporting requirements in paragraph (d) of this clause.

(f) The Contractor is required to report information on a first-tier subcontract covered by
paragraph (d) when the subcontract is awarded. Continued reporting on the same subcontract is
not required unless one of the reported data elements changes during the performance of the
subcontract. The Contractor is not required to make further reports after the first-tier subcontract
expires.

(g)
       (1) If the Contractor in the previous tax year had gross income, from all sources, under
       $300,000, the Contractor is exempt from the requirement to report subcontractor awards.
       (2) If a subcontractor in the previous tax year had gross income from all sources under
       $300,000, the Contractor does not need to report awards for that subcontractor

(h) The FSRS database at http://www.fsrs.gov will be prepopulated with some information from
SAM and FPDS databases. If FPDS information is incorrect, the contractor should notify the
contracting officer. If the SAM database information is incorrect, the contractor is responsible
for correcting this information.
                                         (End of clause)
 Certification G.19

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No




G.20 FAR 52.209-5 Certification Regarding Responsibility Matters (Oct 2015)

 (a)
        (1) The Offeror certifies, to the best of its knowledge and belief, that --
                (i) The Offeror and/or any of its Principals --
                        (A) Are not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for
                        debarment, or declared ineligible for the award of contracts by any
                        Federal agency;
                        (B) Have not within a three-year period preceding this offer, been
                        convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against them for:
                        commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with
                        obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public (Federal,
                        State, or local) contract or subcontract; violation of Federal or
                        State antitrust statutes relating to the submission of offers; or
                        commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification
                        or destruction of records, making false statements, tax evasion,
                        violating Federal criminal tax laws, or receiving stolen property (if
                        offeror checks “have”, the offeror shall also see 52.209-7, if
                        included in this solicitation); and
                        (C) Are not presently indicted for, or otherwise criminally or
                        civilly charged by a governmental entity with, commission of any
                        of the offenses enumerated in paragraph (a)(1)(i)(B) of this
                        provision; and
                        (D) Have not, within a three-year period preceding this offer, been
                        notified of any delinquent Federal taxes in an amount that exceeds
                        $3,500 for which the liability remains unsatisfied.
                               (1) Federal taxes are considered delinquent if both of the
                               following criteria apply:
                                       (i) The tax liability is finally determined. The
                                       liability is finally determined if it has been assessed.
                                       A liability is not finally determined if there is a
      pending administrative or judicial challenge. In the
      case of a judicial challenge to the liability, the
      liability is not finally determined until all judicial
      appeal rights have been exhausted.
      (ii) The taxpayer is delinquent in making payment.
      A taxpayer is delinquent if the taxpayer has failed to
      pay the tax liability when full payment was due and
      required. A taxpayer is not delinquent in cases
      where enforced collection action is precluded.
(2) Examples.
      (i) The taxpayer has received a statutory notice of
      deficiency, under I.R.C. §6212, which entitles the
      taxpayer to seek Tax Court review of a proposed tax
      deficiency. This is not a delinquent tax because it is
      not a final tax liability. Should the taxpayer seek
      Tax Court review, this will not be a final tax
      liability until the taxpayer has exercised all judicial
      appeal rights.
      (ii) The IRS has filed a notice of Federal tax lien
      with respect to an assessed tax liability, and the
      taxpayer has been issued a notice under I.R.C.
      §6320 entitling the taxpayer to request a hearing
      with the IRS Office of Appeals contesting the lien
      filing, and to further appeal to the Tax Court if the
      IRS determines to sustain the lien filing. In the
      course of the hearing, the taxpayer is entitled to
      contest the underlying tax liability because the
      taxpayer has had no prior opportunity to contest the
      liability. This is not a delinquent tax because it is
      not a final tax liability. Should the taxpayer seek tax
      court review, this will not be a final tax liability
      until the taxpayer has exercised all judicial appeal
      rights.
      (iii) The taxpayer has entered into an installment
      agreement pursuant to I.R.C. §6159. The taxpayer is
      making timely payments and is in full compliance
      with the agreement terms. The taxpayer is not
      delinquent because the taxpayer is not currently
      required to make full payment.
                                       (iv) The taxpayer has filed for bankruptcy
                                       protection. The taxpayer is not delinquent because
                                       enforced collection action is stayed under 11 U.S.C.
                                       362 (the Bankruptcy Code).
               (ii) The Offeror has not, within a three-year period preceding this offer,
               had one or more contracts terminated for default by any Federal agency.
       (2) “Principal,” for the purposes of this certification, means an officer; director;
       owner; partner; or a person having primary management or supervisory
       responsibilities within a business entity (e.g., general manager; plant manager;
       head of a division or business segment; and similar positions).
               This Certification Concerns a Matter Within the Jurisdiction of an Agency
               of the United States and the Making of a False, Fictitious, or Fraudulent
               Certification May Render the Maker Subject to Prosecution Under Section
               1001, Title 18, United States Code.


(b) The Offeror shall provide immediate written notice to the Contracting Officer if, at
any time prior to contract award, the Offeror learns that its certification was erroneous
when submitted or has become erroneous by reason of changed circumstances.


(c) A certification that any of the items in paragraph (a) of this provision exists will not
necessarily result in withholding of an award under this solicitation. However, the
certification will be considered in connection with a determination of the Offeror’s
responsibility. Failure of the Offeror to furnish a certification or provide such additional
information as requested by the Contracting Officer may render the Offeror non
responsible.


(d) Nothing contained in the foregoing shall be construed to require establishment of a
system of records in order to render, in good faith, the certification required by paragraph
(a) of this provision. The knowledge and information of an Offeror is not required to
exceed that which is normally possessed by a prudent person in the ordinary course of
business dealings.


(e) The certification in paragraph (a) of this provision is a material representation of fact
upon which reliance was placed when making award. If it is later determined that the
Offeror knowingly rendered an erroneous certification, in addition to other remedies
available to the Government, the Contracting Officer may terminate the contract resulting
from this solicitation for default.
                                      (End of Provision)


 The offeror has read and understood the above provision in this section.
 XYes      No



G.21 FAR 52.209-7 – Information Regarding Responsibility Matters (Jul 2013)


(a) Definitions. As used in this provision—
“Administrative proceeding” means a non-judicial process that is adjudicatory in nature in order
to make a determination of fault or liability (e.g., Securities and Exchange Commission
Administrative Proceedings, Civilian Board of Contract Appeals Proceedings, and Armed
Services Board of Contract Appeals Proceedings). This includes administrative proceeding at the
Federal and State level but only in connection with performance of a Federal contract or grant. It
does not include agency actions such as contract audits, site visits, corrective plans, or inspection
of deliverables.
“Federal contracts and grants with total value greater than $10,000,000” means—
        (1) The total value of all current, active contracts and grants, including all priced options;
        and
        (2) The total value of all current, active orders including all priced options under
        indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity, 8(a), or requirements contracts (including task
        and delivery and multiple-award Schedules).
“Principal” means an officer, director, owner, partner, or a person having primary management
or supervisory responsibilities within a business entity (e.g., general manager; plant manager;
head of a division or business segment; and similar positions).


(b) The offeror does not have current active Federal contracts and grants with total value greater
than $10,000,000.


(c) If the offeror checked “has” in paragraph (b) of this provision, the offeror represents, by
submission of this offer, that the information it has entered in the Federal Awardee Performance
and Integrity Information System (FAPIIS) is current, accurate, and complete as of the date of
submission of this offer with regard to the following information:
       (1) Whether the offeror, and/or any of its principals, has or has not, within the last five
       years, in connection with the award to or performance by the offeror of a Federal contract
       or grant, been the subject of a proceeding, at the Federal or State level that resulted in any
       of the following dispositions:
               (i) In a criminal proceeding, a conviction.
               (ii) In a civil proceeding, a finding of fault and liability that results in the payment
               of a monetary fine, penalty, reimbursement, restitution, or damages of $5,000 or
               more.
               (iii) In an administrative proceeding, a finding of fault and liability that results
               in—
                       (A) The payment of a monetary fine or penalty of $5,000 or more; or
                       (B) The payment of a reimbursement, restitution, or damages in excess of
                       $100,000.
               (iv) In a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding, a disposition of the matter
               by consent or compromise with an acknowledgment of fault by the Contractor if
               the proceeding could have led to any of the outcomes specified in paragraphs
               (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), or (c)(1)(iii) of this provision.
       (2) If the offeror has been involved in the last five years in any of the occurrences listed
       in (c)(1) of this provision, whether the offeror has provided the requested information
       with regard to each occurrence.


(d) The offeror shall post the information in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (c)(1)(iv) of this
provision in FAPIIS as required through maintaining an active registration in the System for
Award Management database via https://www.acquisition.gov (see 52.204-7).
                                         (End of provision)


 Certification G.21

 The offeror has read and understood the above provision in this section.
 XYes No

G.22 306-1b Invoice and Contract Financing Requests Submission – Invoice Processing
Platform (IPP) (May 2018)

(a)Payments shall be rendered in accordance with the identified payment schedule(s), and any
other incorporated payment clause(s), specified rates, and/or fixed price amounts.
(b)The contractor shall submit invoices electronically by means of the web-based system,
Invoice Processing Platform (IPP) that can be accessed at: http://www.ipp.gov/. All submitted
invoices must be accompanied by supporting documentation in accordance with the contract's
terms and conditions. The supporting documentation shall be submitted in the following formats:
Adobe Acrobat (pdf), Microsoft Word (doc), Pictures (jpeg), Microsoft Excel (excel), and
Microsoft Outlook message (msg).

(c)Invoice Number Format – The format for the invoice shall be the contract number followed by
the invoice number. The invoice number shall have no spaces, dashes, or other special
characters. The invoice number cannot exceed 21 characters. Examples of acceptable invoice
number formats are as follows:


       Contract Number: 91990018C0001
       Contractor's Invoice No.: 15897126341
       IPP Invoice No.: 91990018C000115897126 (Note that the last three digits ["341"] from
       the Contractor's invoice number were removed due to the 21 character limitation.)


Contractor's invoice number were removed due to the 21 character limitation.)
(d)If the Contractor has not already established an IPP account that is active, an IPP account will
be automatically created on behalf of the Contractor. The automatically created IPP account will
be issued to the Designated Primary Administrator, which will be the individual that has been
identified in the "Accounts Receivable POC" Section of the Contractor's System for Award
Management (SAM) registration located at https://www.sam.gov/portal/public/SAM/.

(e)Within ten (10) business days of the Contractor entering or updating the Accounts Receivable
POC information within the Contractor's SAM registration, the Designated Primary
Administrator will receive an email from the IPP Customer Support Team containing the
Designated Primary Administrator's IPP username. Within 24 hours of receiving the initial
email, the Designated Primary Administrator will receive a second email containing their IPP
password. Once both emails have been received, the Designated Primary Administrator must log
into IPP and complete the registration process.

(f)The Contractor's Designated Primary Administrator will be authorized to further designate
other administrators under the Contractor's IPP account who may submit invoices on behalf of
the Contractor.

(g)The Contractor must ensure that the "Accounts Receivable POC" Section of its SAM
registration is accurate and up to date.
(h)In the event that an invoice is rejected, the contractor shall make the necessary corrections and
resubmit the invoice by means of IPP. Any questions, concerns, or issues regarding the use of
IPP should be directed to IPP Customer Support Team, as identified at http://www.ipp.gov/
                                           (End of clause)

 Certification G.22

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause under this section.
 XYes No


G.23 Clause 31.205.70 - Food Costs
No food may be provided under this contract or in association with this contract unless consent is
provided below. The cost of food under this contract is unallowable unless the contractor
receives written consent from the Contracting Officer prior to the incurrence of the cost. If the
contractor wishes to be reimbursed for a food cost, it must make a request in writing at least 21
days prior to the day that costs would be incurred. The contractor shall include in its request the
following: the purpose of the event at which the food will be served, why the food is integral to
fulfill a government requirement in the contract, and the proposed costs. The lack of a timely
response from the Contracting Officer shall not constitute constructive acceptance of the
allowability of the proposed charge. Consent is hereby given to the contractor to: Funds are not
authorized for the use of food.
Meetings – Include, but are not limited to, non-routine formal conferences, congresses,
conventions, seminars, symposiums, workshops, with a published and substantive agenda with
scheduled speakers and concern matters of topical interest to participants from multiple agencies
and/or non-governmental participants. As used in this directive, “meetings” do not include
purely internal routine business meetings primarily involving discussions of day-to-day internal
procedures or operations such as, but not limited to, ED-sponsored staff meetings, all-hands
meetings, working groups, retreats, etc.


 Certification G.24

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No
G.25 Clause 31.205.71 - Travel Costs
No invitational travel (defined as: Official government travel conducted by a non-federal
employee in order to provide a “direct service” [i.e. presenting on a topic, serving as a facilitator,
serving on a Federal Advisory Committee Act, or advising in an area of expertise] to the
government) may be provided under this contract or in association with this contract unless
consent is provided below. The cost of invitational travel under this contract is unallowable
unless the contractor receives written consent from the Contracting Officer prior to the
incurrence of the cost. If the contractor wishes to be reimbursed for a cost related to invitational
travel, it must make a request in writing at least 21 days prior to the day that costs would be
incurred. The contractor shall include in its request the following: why the invitational travel
cost is integral to fulfill a government requirement in the contract, and the proposed cost that
must be in accordance with federal travel regulations. The lack of a timely response from the
Contracting Officer shall not constitute constructive acceptance of the allow ability of the
proposed charge. Consent is hereby given to the contractor to: Funds are not authorized for the
use of travel.


 Certification G.25

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No


G.26 Clause 313.237-72 Clearance of Conferences/Meetings (DECEMBER 2012)
Any hotel/venue contract that the Contractor negotiates must be reviewed by and receive
concurrence from an Event Services Team member prior to final agreement. The Event Services
staff can be contacted at (202) 401-3679 or event.services@ed.gov. Comps: The Contractor does
not have authority to negotiate or accept room upgrades for Department or Contractor staff.
However, the Contractor is authorized to exercise its best efforts to obtain other Comps of
necessary items/services that the Department would otherwise seek to procure in furtherance of
the conference/meeting (i.e., meeting rooms, sleeping rooms, audio-visual equipment, etc.) Dual
Compensation: Contractors are prohibited from receiving compensation from both the
Department and any other source for conference planning performed pursuant to the terms of this
Contract. If the vendor receives any compensation from another source as a result of conference
services performed for the Department, the Contractor will report this compensation to the
Contracting Officer and offset its invoice to the Department in an equal amount.


 Certification G.26

 The offeror has read and understood the above clause in this section.
 XYes No
This proposal information is not counted toward the 15-page limit of the project narrative.


G.27 EDAR 3452.243-70 Key Personnel (March 2011)

(a) The personnel designated as key personnel in this contract are considered to be essential to
    the work being performed hereunder. Prior to diverting any of the specified individuals to
    other programs, or otherwise substituting any other personnel for specified personnel, the
    contractor shall notify the contracting officer reasonably in advance and shall submit
    justification (including proposed substitutions) in sufficient detail to permit evaluation of the
    impact on the contract effort. No diversion or substitution shall be made by the contractor
    without written consent of the contracting officer; provided, that the contracting officer may
    ratify a diversion or substitution in writing and that ratification shall constitute the consent of
    the contracting officer required by this clause. The contract shall be modified to reflect the
    addition or deletion of key personnel.
(b) The following personnel have been identified as Key Personnel in the performance of this
    contract:

                Labor category                                            Name
 Principal Investigator                              Brandon Helding
 Contract Administrator – Offeror’s point of         Brandon Helding
 contact with signature authority
                                           Appendix H
This is not applicable as our business model is already in place.
